B'Elanna Torres receives vivid dreams from an unknown passenger aboard Voyager.


== Summary ==


=== Teaser ===
"Captain's log, stardate 50203.1. We're three days away from Enara Prime, home of the passengers we picked up from a colony in the Fima system. Our high warp capability has greatly reduced the time it normally takes them to make the journey home. In return, the Enarans have shared their energy conservation technology with us and, perhaps more importantly, their friendship."
Lieutenant B'Elanna Torres and Ensign Harry Kim work with a guests Jessen and Jora Mirell in Engineering to install their energy conservation technology. When they decide to resume work the next day, Kim and Jessen go for dinner together while Torres and Jora Mirell retire to bed. In bed, Torres has a vivid dream of a passionate love affair with a young Enaran male, Dathan Alaris, who calls her Korenna. The next morning, back in her quarters, Chakotay wakes her: she overslept and didn't answer when he tried to reach her. When Chakotay asks if she's feeling alright, she insists, with a hidden smile, she is.


=== Act One ===
On the way to Engineering, Chakotay presses Torres for why she's been late two mornings in a row. Torres tells him about the dreams, her excitement, and the details of the love affair. He's amused, but implies he will have to write her up for oversleeping. Torres swears him to silence.

In the mess hall, Neelix unveils new decorations for an Enaran-themed party to recognize their guests. Tom Paris and Kim are amazed at the authenticity, and the Enarans lounge on cushions to enjoy it. Kim joins Jessen while Jor Brel, the Enaran leader, plays a traditional Enaran musical instrument. Brel offers to help Captain Kathryn Janeway play it, and she agrees. She didn't realize he meant to share his experiences and knowledge through a telepathic link. She is startled, not expecting such intense contact, but appreciates the experience and understands it was innocent. Brel apologizes and the incident is settled.
Meanwhile, Torres turns in early to return to the dream. This one is not as pleasant, her lover is revealed to be forbidden to contact her. Torres, as Korenna, is scolded by her father, Jareth, for continuing to see him. The moment her father leaves, Alaris, emerges from where he hid in a back room. They embrace, but suddenly his skin becomes badly burned. Torres backs away, gasping in surprise and distress.


=== Act Two ===
Torres updates Chakotay on the energy conservation efforts, then turns to the dreams. She explains the continuity forming a narrative, and how real it seems. They agree there may be more going on with a group of telepaths on board. Chakotay suggests she talk to one of the Enarans she's been working with in Engineering while he informs Janeway.
On her way to engineering, Torres experiences another dream, this time without sleeping. The dream depicts a ceremony in which Torres' character is given a Citizenship Award by her father. Her father gives a speech about the beginnings of terraforming leading to colonization efforts. Her lover surprises her, risking being seen with her to participate in her big day. They affirm their love, want to embrace, but can't risk it. They promise to see each other the next day.
Meanwhile, Kes finds Torres unconscious in the corridor near engineering, and reports the medical emergency.


=== Act Three ===
Torres startles awake in sickbay, to a relieved Janeway and Kes. The Doctor finds strong signs of telepathic activity and determines Torres is experiencing implanted memories in her subconscious. He wants to put a cortical inhibitor on her to suppress theta wave activity. Torres hesitates, as she wants to see the story through. When the Doctor reiterates she risks brain damage, she relents.
Janeway, with Tuvok asks Brel about the incident. Brel is skeptical anyone is doing this intentionally. His guess is that she is sensitive to the stray thoughts and memories of all Enarans on the ship, and Torres' mind is organizing them. After he leaves, Tuvok and Torres agree Brel's explanation is plausible. Janeway admits there's no sign of a hidden agenda with the Enarans; however, she wants to investigate further. Tuvok affirms he will help her. Janeway orders Torres to take time off, despite her objections.

"Captain's log, stardate 50211.4. We're approaching Enara and preparing to host a farewell party for our guests. They've made every effort to help us understand their telepathic abilities but it's still a mystery why they've affected Lieutenant Torres so strongly."
Torres paces restlessly in her quarters until she relents and removes the inhibitor to allow another dream to occur. This time, Korenna talks with her father about the Regressives' impending resettlement being voluntary. He tells her their chosen way of life has led to hazardous living conditions in their village, and they realize they will better off living somewhere else. Later, she participates in preparing the people for transport. Some are silent, but one person wants more information on what will happen where they are going. Korenna can't answer her. When Korenna's father calls Alaris' name, Korenna is surprised. As she tells her father she was unaware Alaris was on the list, another person resists the processing. Korenna is knocked down, leaving her with a laceration on the side of her face.
When Torres wakes, she goes immediately to Jora Mirell's quarters, remembering she has a scar in the same area. When Mirell doesn't answer the door chime, she breaks in and finds her on the floor. Torres confirms that Jora Mirell is, in fact, Korenna. Mirell insists on giving her the rest of the memories because she won't deny the truth. She grabs Torres' neck and Torres finds herself in another dream, playing the Enaran musical instrument.


=== Act Four ===
Torres, as Korenna in her room again, stops playing when Alaris knocks on her window as before. When she lets him in, Alaris explains he "got away" and is leaving that night. He asks Korenna to join him, but she can't leave her family and career. Alaris tells her the rumor: the Regressives are not going to a new colony, but are vaporized. Korenna insists there are plausible explanations for not being able to get in contact with those who already left, but Alaris offers to show her more evidence. Korenna's father interrupts them, and Alaris hides. Jareth tells his daughter the Regressives are lying and manipulating their society, and her, to hold back progress. He claims he's seen Alaris talking with other young women and only wants to turn her against her family. Korenna is swayed and signals where Alaris hides in the next room.
Later, Alaris and another Regressive are executed: burned, like she saw earlier. Korenna's father gives a speech about protecting their ideals from destructive Regressive influence. Korenna watches silently until the crowd cheers at their deaths. Korenna joins in. After this, Korenna is shown teaching children about the Regressives eventually wiping themselves out through infighting and disease. 
Torres wakes up to find Jora is dead.


=== Act Five ===
At a gathering between the crew and the Enarans, Torres confronts Brel as he makes a toast. She calls the Enarans murderers and announces all she knows about the Regressives, the executions, and blame assigned to the victims for their deaths. Further, she accuses Brel of having Jora Mirell killed. She resists all attempts to move the conversation to a private venue, and explains how Jora Mirell passed her memories to her. The Enarans are skeptical, saying that they would never do something like that. Janeway tells Torres to see her in her ready room in one hour.
Janeway, despite believing Torres' story, allows the Enarans to disembark. She tells Torres it is their right to conceal a part of their history from themselves. Torres desperately suggests they could look into it if a murder occurred on their ship, but Janeway already had The Doctor examine Jora Mirell for signs of foul play. He found none. They have no basis to launch any kind of investigation, however Janeway has trade negotiations as well as shore leave canceled, and orders Voyager leave orbit as soon as all the Enarans have disembarked. Janeway mentions that the Enaran engineers are still packing their equipment, and suggests that if Torres has anything more to say, she should talk to them. Torres thanks Janeway and leaves.
In engineering, Torres finds Jessen, who remains guarded. Torres challenges her to look on Enara for the colony where the Regressives were supposedly settled, ask questions, and learn the truth. When Torres regrets she could simply give her the memories telepathically, Jessen tells Torres that she can establish the telepathic link. Torres agrees, and Jessen begins the same story Torres experienced from the beginning.


== Memorable quotes ==
"Maybe he's right. The Enarans haven't shown any hint of subterfuge, any hidden agenda. They've been nothing but straightforward and honest. You're in no immediate danger. They'll be gone in another day. The situation will resolve itself."
"And yet, you fully intend to continue investigating."
"I wonder how long it's been since I did anything that surprised you."

- Captain Janeway and Tuvok

"Why don't you go on without me."(Harry Kim and Jessen leave) "No, really. I insist."

- B'Elanna Torres

"I don't think satisfying your curiosity is worth risking brain damage, lieutenant."

- The Doctor, to Torres

"I wish… I had your abilities. I could just show you."
"You would do that? Share your experiences openly?"
"Of course."

- B'Elanna Torres and Jessen

"So that's it? We just go on our merry way and nobody ever has to take any kind of responsibility?"

- B'Elanna Torres to Captain Janeway


== Background information ==


=== Story and script ===
This episode was meant as a parable to the Holocaust and was conceived of as a Deanna Troi episode for Star Trek: The Next Generation. Joe Menosky, co-writer of the episode's story, recalled, "That episode was actually a Next Generation story that Brannon [Braga] and I came up with a long, long time ago, and it was going to be a Troi story. Lisa Klink took it over and reworked it and made it a Voyager episode." (Cinefantastique, Vol. 29, No. 6/7, p. 92)
The final draft of this episode's script was submitted on 16 July 1996. [1]


=== Cast and characters ===
Actress Roxann Dawson was thrilled with the teleplay of this episode. She remarked, "It was a brilliant script […] I felt the show had something to say." (The Official Star Trek: Voyager Magazine issue 12) Additionally, Dawson enthused, "I loved the story – it was so well written." (Star Trek: The Magazine Volume 2, Issue 2, p. 18)
Dawson also enjoyed appearing in this episode, as well as the connections between her two roles of Torres and Korenna Mirell. The actress raved, "I loved having the opportunity to do that show [....] I loved being able to play the two characters, and how Korenna's life influenced B'Elanna's." (The Official Star Trek: Voyager Magazine issue 12) In fact, Dawson cited this episode – towards the end of Voyager's seventh and final season – as being "the episode I'm probably most proud of," and further said, "It was a great opportunity to play two characters, really." (Star Trek: The Magazine Volume 2, Issue 2, p. 18)
Roxann Dawson's performance herein made the episode a prominent one for both Lisa Klink and director Winrich Kolbe. Following her work on the third season, Klink remarked, "[Roxann] was amazing in this episode. I think that all of our actors are very good, but in this particular instance, this one performance stands out in my mind from the whole season as just being remarkable." (Cinefantastique, Vol. 29, No. 6/7, p. 92) At the end of Voyager's fourth season, Kolbe said of "Remember", "That sticks out because of Roxann. She did a terrific job and she's getting better and better." (The Official Star Trek: Voyager Magazine issue 15)
An aspect of the episode that thrilled Roxann Dawson was the opportunity to perform alongside the actor who played Jareth. "Bruce Davison was extraordinary," Dawson commented. "I've always wanted to work with him. I had known of him since I lived in New York City, and he was just brilliant." (The Official Star Trek: Voyager Magazine issue 12)
Janeway actress Kate Mulgrew also enjoyed this episode. Midway through saying that she thought highly of both Roxann Dawson and Winrich Kolbe, Mulgrew enthused of their work here, "I loved 'Remember' which she [Dawson] shot with my boyfriend [Kolbe]." (Cinefantastique, Vol. 29, No. 6/7, p. 84)


=== Reception ===
Ultimately, Brannon Braga was disappointed by this episode; he would have preferred that the episode had been done as an installment of TNG and felt that Schindler's List as well as subsequent awareness of the Holocaust had taken the edge off this episode's genocide-related story. (Cinefantastique, Vol. 29, No. 6/7, p. 92)
On the other hand, Joe Menosky favored the episode's final form over its TNG origins. "I think, ironically enough, that it was better as a Voyager than it would have been as a TNG," he enthused, "and I think better as a Torres story than it would have been as a Troi story. Because in some ways, not having a 'sensitive' character and to be thrown into this situation is a little more effective." (Cinefantastique, Vol. 29, No. 6/7, p. 92)
Winrich Kolbe was impressed with the writing of this episode. Referring indirectly to Roxann Dawson, Kolbe opined, "The story they built around her for that show was very good, very creative." (The Official Star Trek: Voyager Magazine issue 15)
This episode achieved a Nielsen rating of 4.7 million homes, and an 8% share. [2](X)
Cinefantastique rated this episode 3 out of 4 stars. (Cinefantastique, Vol. 29, No. 6/7, p. 90)
Star Trek Magazine scored this episode 3 out of 5 stars, defined as "Warp Speed". Additionally, Lou Anders, a writer of the magazine, wrote a review of the installment, commenting, "'Remember' deals with a very important theme in the way that the best Star Trek episodes always do. However, while the subject matter is important, the episode is not as exciting as other recent outings." (Star Trek Monthly issue 24, p. 59)
The unauthorized reference book Delta Quadrant (p. 145) gives this installment a rating of 6 out of 10.
Executive producer Jeri Taylor stated that both this episode and the previous one ("False Profits") were examples of episodes which "didn't work", yet maintained that "Coda" and "Nothing Human" did work. (Star Trek: Voyager - A Vision of the Future)


=== Continuity ===
In this episode, Janeway quips to Tuvok, "I wonder how long it's been since I did anything that surprised you." Two episodes prior, in "The Swarm", Tuvok claims to be surprised by her decision to pass through the swarm's space. "The Swarm" was actually produced after this episode though, and has a later stardate of 50252.3.
This episode's plot is similar to that of VOY Season 6's "Memorial", although the entire crew relives a terrible past as if it was part of their memories.


=== Video and DVD releases ===
UK VHS release (two-episode tapes, CIC Video): Volume 3.3, 24 February 1997
As part of the VOY Season 3 DVD collection


== Links and references ==


=== Starring ===
Kate Mulgrew as Captain Kathryn Janeway


=== Also starring ===
Robert Beltran as Commander Chakotay
Roxann Dawson as Lieutenant B'Elanna Torres
Jennifer Lien as Kes
Robert Duncan McNeill as Lieutenant Tom Paris
Ethan Phillips as Neelix
Robert Picardo as The Doctor
Tim Russ as Lieutenant Tuvok
Garrett Wang as Ensign Harry Kim


=== Guest stars ===
Eugene Roche as Jor Brel
Charles Esten as Dathan Alaris
Athena Massey as Jessen
Eve H. Brenner as Jora Mirell / Korenna Mirell


=== Special guest star ===
Bruce Davison as Jareth


=== Co-stars ===
Nancy Kaine as Woman
Tina Reddington as Girl
Majel Barrett as Computer Voice


=== Uncredited co-stars ===
Michael Beebe as Murphy
Angela Brown as Enaran cadet
John Copage as sciences officer
Ron DeMore as Enaran soldier
Alexander James Egan as Enaran boy
Brian Hall as Enaran cadet
Sue Henley as Brooks
Ken Jackman as Enaran civilian
B. Johnson as Enaran girl
Scott Leva as Fredik
Stuart Nixon as Enaran civilian
Jack Nolan as Enaran cadet
Kate Ricci as Enaran cadet
Richard Sarstedt as William McKenzie
Evelyn Sein as Enaran civilian
Paul Seymore as Enaran soldier
Pablo Soriano as Demalos
John Tampoya as Kashimuro Nozawa
John Thaddeus as Enaran regressive
Sam Vanny as Enaran cadet
Robin Van Sharner as Farran
Unknown performers as
Peshar
Enaran civilian
Female Enaran regressive


=== Stunt double ===
Leslie Hoffman as stunt double for Roxann Dawson


=== Stand-ins ===
June Jordan – stand-in for Tina Reddington


=== References ===
accusation; algae puff; ankle; career; Citizenship Award; colony; color; communications interlink; consent (mutual consent); cortical inhibitor; Danius Cliffs; Dathan's uncle and his family; disinfectant; District Education Center; duty shift; Enara Prime; Enaran; Enaran light-emitting object; Enaran musical instrument; EPS conduit; ethics; evidence; experience; Fima colony; Fima system; frontal lobe; heart; high warp capability; holonovel; hoverball; Jor; Kashimuro Nozawa; knowledge; leader; microfusion generator; mind; nap; neural pathway; oven; oversleeping; personal hygiene; poison; power relay; question; radioseptic; raw; Regressive; secrecy; shore leave; synaptic pattern; Talax; tarin juice; telepathy; telepathic ability; terraforming; thermal sweep; theta waves, toast; trade negotiation; truth; uncle; village; voila


=== External links ===
"Remember" at Memory Beta, the wiki for licensed Star Trek works
"Remember" at Wikipedia
"Remember" at MissionLogPodcast.com
"Remember" at the Internet Movie Database