The "HMS Bounty" was the name given to the B'rel-class Klingon Bird-of-Prey commandeered by James T. Kirk and his command crew in 2285. The name was originally suggested by Dr. Leonard McCoy as an ironic joke, in reference to the famous sea-going vessel of the same name which was taken over by mutineers in the 18th century. The vessel's new name was painted on the hull in large, orange letters. (Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home)


== Genesis ==

The Bird-of-Prey, operating under its original name, was a 23rd century Klingon starship. This Bird-of-Prey was in the custody of the Klingon Imperial Fleet. Commander Kruge was the commanding officer of this ship. He had convinced the crewmembers aboard the vessel that they should acquire the Genesis Device from the Federation for the empire. In furtherance of this goal, the Bird-of-Prey attempted to disable the USS Grissom by targeting the engine section, which resulted in the inadvertent destruction of the science vessel.
Later, in a confrontation with the USS Enterprise, the bulk of Kruge's crew was killed when Kirk manipulated them into boarding the Enterprise, which was subsequently destroyed via self-destruct. After the death of Kruge on the surface of the Genesis Planet, Kirk and his crew were easily able to commandeer the ship, and used it to transport Spock, whose body had been regenerated by the Genesis wave, to Mount Seleya on Vulcan, where his katra was successfully reunited with his body. (Star Trek III: The Search for Spock)


== The voyage home ==

After three months of exile on Vulcan, during which the Bounty underwent repairs, such as maintenance and conversion of some of its operating systems, Kirk and his crew used the ship to return to Earth in order to face charges regarding their unauthorized appropriation of the Enterprise. During their journey home, however, they were made aware of the destructive effects on Earth of an extremely powerful alien probe. 
Upon further investigation, Spock realized that the probe was attempting to establish communication with humpback whales, a species which had been extinct for two hundred years. Having no choice, the crew elected to undertake the extremely risky slingshot effect to travel back in time and retrieve two humpbacks, with the intention of returning to the 23rd century and re-establishing communication with the probe.

After successfully using a time warp to travel to the year 1986, Kirk ordered the Bounty set down in Golden Gate Park under cloak. Although it initially appeared as if the crew would be unable to return to their own time due to the de-crystallization of the ship's dilithium crystals as a result of the time travel, Spock was able to develop a plan whereby high-energy photons could be collected from the nuclear reactor of a naval vessel, and then injected into the dilithium chamber, causing recrystallization. 
As this was occurring, Captain Scott performed a series of modifications to the Bounty's cargo bay, transforming it into a whale tank with which to transport the humpbacks. The modifications complete, the Bounty departed to retrieve the whales, finding them being hunted by a Finnish whaling vessel attempting to kill them for harvest. Operating under cloak, the crew positioned the Bounty between the boat and the whales, successfully deflecting a harpoon. Kirk then ordered the Bounty decloaked, an act which had the effect of frightening the whalers off.
Using the Bounty's transporters, the whales were beamed aboard, and the crew recreated the time warp and returned to the 23rd century. (Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home)


== Loss and recovery ==

Upon their arrival, the Bounty's power systems began to fail as a result of their close proximity to the probe, and subsequently splashed down north-west of Alcatraz in San Francisco Bay. 
With no power left to open the bay doors, and the ship starting to sink, George and Gracie were trapped and in danger of drowning.  After seeing to the safe evacuation of Scotty and Dr. Gillian Taylor, Kirk swam underwater to access the explosive override, opening the doors and freeing the whales. After a brief round of communication between the whales and the probe, the probe ceased its destructive signal and departed Earth, while the Bounty's crew celebrated their success. With its mission complete, the Bounty sank into the bay. (Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home)
The Bounty was subsequently recovered from the bay, though finding it took some time as its cloaking device had reactivated. The ship was then restored to functionality and placed on display in the Fleet Museum at Athan Prime.

Jack Crusher was vaguely familiar with the incident, referring to it as "the whole whale thing". In 2401, Ensign Sidney La Forge and Jack Crusher removed the cloaking device from the Bounty and installed it, with Commodore Geordi La Forge's help, on the USS Titan-A. This enabled the Titan to evade the USS Sternbach and the USS Cole long enough to extract its away team from Daystrom Station. (PIC: "The Bounty") The Bounty's cloak was later used again by the crew who managed to avoid Borg assimilation in their efforts to hold off an assimilated Starfleet. However, the cloak was eventually destroyed by Sidney and Alandra La Forge while under Borg control. (PIC: "The Last Generation")


== Personnel ==
See: Kruge's Bird-of-Prey personnel