The USS Athena (NCC-392023) was a Federation Academy-class starship operated by Starfleet in the 32nd century. (SA: "Kids These Days")


== History ==
In 3192, Starfleet sought to re-open its training academy on its historic campus in San Francisco under the chancellorship of Nahla Ake. The Athena first collected new recruits at an unknown location in space before setting course for Earth. En route, the ship detected an anomaly near the Badlands and dropped out of warp to study it. However, the anomaly was a trap set by Nus Braka, an old foe of Ake's who had detected Caleb Mir's efforts to communicate with his long lost mother. Braka's ship disabled many of the Athena's systems, including weapons, and demanded the Athena's warp core. Before he could extract the core, the combined efforts of cadets Mir, SAM, Darem Reymi, and Genesis Lythe disabled Braka's programmable matter, allowing the Athena to destroy his Venari Ral ship while Braka fled in an Athena escape pod. The ship resumed course for Earth, ultimately landing safely at the San Francisco campus, which it shares with the War College, which trained Starfleet officers on Earth after the Burn. (SA: "Kids These Days")
Soon after the Athena hosted a Betazoid delegation and talks regarding the planet's possible return to the Federation, with key negotiations taking place publicly in its Sato Atrium. (SA: "Beta Test")
On its first official space journey as the home of Starfleet Academy, the Athena spent three days circling the Val Nebula. While there, cadet Jay-Den Kraag suggested a solution to the Klingon diaspora crisis that it was hoped would lead the surviving Klingon refugees to settle on the uninhabited Federation world of Faan Alpha, an offer the Klingons had rejected when made as charity. The Athena's saucer section separated from the rest of the ship and journeyed at warp to Faan Alpha, where it and other Starfleet vessels engaged in a brief performative skirmish against Klingon forces. The Federation officially surrendered the planet to the Klingons and the Athena's saucer section returned to its primary hull. (SA: "Vox In Excelso")
The Athena later traveled to the wreckage of the USS Miyazaki to conduct a joint exercise between the Academy and War College cadets. However, as soon as the away team was onboard the Miyazaki, they were taken hostage by the Furies, who demanded a latinum ransom and warned off any other Starfleet ships within a light year. In consulting with Admiral Charles Vance that the Furies will likely kill their hostages even with their demands met, the Athena played host to Nus Braka, whose warrants were briefly suspended, and managed to negotiate a suspension of dilithium deliveries to the Taygeta system in exchange for knowledge of the Furies' vulnerability to sonic weapons. Meanwhile, on the advice of Cadet Lythe, the Athena discreetly sent out a probe to locate the cloaked Furies vessel in the debris field, while Cadet Tarima Sadal used her telepathic connection to Mir to coordinate their rescue. Unfortunately, after Braka's departure and the arrival of the USS Sargasso, the Athena discovered a Venari Ral ship and realized they were working with the Furies and the whole negotiation was a ploy for the Venari Ral to assault Starbase J19-Alpha. The Athena managed to beam out the away team, with the only casualties being Lieutenant Commander Tomov and Cadet B'Avi. (SA: "Come, Let's Away")
At the end of the year, with the discovery that Braka was weaponizing Omega-47, the Athena was ordered to join most of the Federation fleet in defending Betazed. However, several of the cadets went on an unauthorized mission into Venari Ral space to find Anisha Mir. The remaining cadets and crew were off-loaded at Betazed under the supervision of Cadet Master Lura Thok while Ake, Commander Jett Reno and the Doctor took the Athena to the edge of Federation space utilizing the automated bridge systems to help pilot the ship with no other crew. It was subsequently discovered that Cadets Kraag and Tarima Sadal had stowed away using a design flaw.
The Athena crossed into the Venari Ral sector and performed a daring maneuver, dropping into the atmosphere of Ukeck to beam the cadets and Anisha out. However, the ship was forced out of warp by an isolytic charge and it was caught in the tractor beams of three Venari Ral ships. To escape, the Athena performed a saucer separation, leaving part of the ship in Venari Ral hands.
The field of Omega-47 mines established on the Federation border left the Athena - crewed only by Ake, the Doctor, Reno, Anisha and several cadets - as the only Federation ship not trapped by Braka's forces. Ake had the Athena hide in a nebula and broadcast a distress call to Federation Headquarters and any Federation ship that could hear it. (SA: "300th Night")
The Athena established contact with Admiral Charles Vance and Commander Thok who revealed that the detonation of the mines would cause a disaster worse than the Burn and the Athena was on her own with not even the USS Discovery able to cross the wall via its spore drive. The ship came under attack by the Venari Ral, suffering heavy damage. While the cadets hid using the same design flaw that allowed Kraag and Sadal to stow away, Braka and the Venari Ral boarded the ship, captured Ake and Anisha and seemingly destroyed the Athena. However, Reno was able to get the shields back online in time to stop most of the torpedoes while the Doctor used the navigational deflector to extend his holographic matrix around the ship, creating an illusion of the Athena being destroyed. The saucer was left with hull breaches, a damaged warp core leaking plasma, no sensors and only 1/8 impulse power via thrusters.
Under the command of Reno, the crew managed to restore short-range sensors, partial impulse, and repair the warp core, but couldn't fix the long-range sensors, shields or weapons. Using Mir's connection to his mother and Sadal's abilities, the Athena located where Braka was holding the Trial of the Federation aboard the detached Sato Atrium. On Darem Reymi's suggestion, the Athena warped into the Beithir system and hid in a gas giant. While Mir joined Anisha and Ake to buy some time, the Athena intercepted the mine's control frequency and SAM broadcast an algorithm that stabilized the Omega-47 and deactivated the mines. With the minefield down, Vance arrived with the entire Federation fleet to force the Venari Ral's surrender and to arrest Nus Braka.
Subsequently, the saucer reconnected with the rest of the ship and joined the rest of the fleet in traveling to Betazed for the commissioning of the new Federation Headquarters. (SA: "Rubincon")


== Command crew ==
Commanding officer/Chancellor
Nahla Ake (3195-)
First officer/Cadet Master
Lura Thok (3195-)
Chief medical officer
The Doctor (3195-)
Helmsman/Conn officer
Thelonious Dandrid (3195-)
Tactical officer
Mackenzie Ya (3195-)
Operations officer
Hayden Thriss (3195-)
Communications officer
Astrid Atlee (3195-)
Science officer
Weldu (3195-)
Academic liaison
Rork (3195-)
Additional bridge officer
Haile (3195-)
See also: USS Athena personnel


== Signage ==
USS Athena dedication plaque
USS Athena commemoration wall