The USS Cerritos (NCC-75567) was a Federation California-class starship operated by Starfleet in the 24th century, under the command of Captain Carol Freeman and later Jack Ransom. (LD: "Second Contact", "The New Next Generation")


== Service history ==


=== Carol Freeman's command ===


==== 2380 ====

The Cerritos was in service by stardate 57436.2 in 2380, where it was docked at Douglas Station before its second contact mission with the Galardonian High Council.
During this mission, as Commander Jack Ransom was wrapping up his visit with the Galardonian High Council, he was bitten by a flying insect before beaming back to the ship, where he dismissed it. Later, this insect bite caused Ransom to have a seizure at the bar, due to a viral infection. The crew panicked as he suddenly became feral, and attacked other crew members by biting them, spreading the infection.
The situation quickly got out of hand, and the call was made for any uninfected crew members to meet in transporter room 8. As the crew gathered, Ensigns Brad Boimler and Beckett Mariner beamed back to the ship and were surprised to see what was going on around them. Boimler was still covered in a pink slime that he picked up on the surface after a run-in with a teething Spider cow, which Doctor T'Ana determined could be used to synthesize a cure for this virus. After one was produced, it was able to be distributed through the ventilation system, restoring the crew to their normal selves. In the aftermath, it was found that several power relays were damaged by the infected crew, leading to at least one turbolift breaking down. (LD: "Second Contact", "Caves")

On stardate 57601.3, the Cerritos was called to Mixtus III to assist the USS Vancouver with the controlled implosion of an unstable moon that threatened the population. Besides assisting in terms of manpower, Captain Freeman was also instrumental in helping Mixtus inhabitants to reach mutually acceptable solutions that allowed the implosion to go forward. (LD: "Cupid's Errant Arrow")
The Cerritos was engaged in a standoff with the Drookmani over the salvage of a wrecked Antares-type cargo ship. The Drookmani started picking a fight with the Cerritos by throwing debris at the ship with their tractor beam. Captain Freeman refused to engage them in a fight due to diplomatic reasons. The Cerritos stood her ground as the Drookmani continued to throw debris, weakening their shields. Freeman's patience eventually ran out, but it was too late to fight back. Shields and weapons became disabled. Freeman almost gave the order to abandon ship, when they noticed that the Drookmani ship started breaking apart due to a corrupted isolinear core that was ejected from an airlock by Ensigns Mariner and Boimler. (LD: "Terminal Provocations")

Captain Freeman, Commander Ransom, and Lieutenant Shaxs were selected by Admiral Syltrack for a mission to the Pisepian agricultural colony in disputed territory. In their absence, Captain Amina Ramsey of the USS Oakland was put in temporary command of the Cerritos, accompanied by Lieutenants Durga, Ottessa Warren, and Drew Prachett. Under Ramsey's command, the Cerritos journeyed to Khwopa to perform repairs on the inhabitants' water filtration system before rendezvousing with the USS Rubidoux, which was found adrift in space. It was later discovered that the Rubidoux had been invaded by a space entity that was feeding on the ship's energy. Captain Ramsey and her away team were able to save Captain Dayton and her crew before the entity consumed the whole ship. The destruction of the Rubidoux resulted in the birth of a space vessel lifeform. (LD: "Much Ado About Boimler")

When responding to USS Solvang's distress call originated from the Kalla system, the Cerritos' crew discovered that it was destroyed with the loss of all hands. Soon the Cerritos was attacked and captured by the same unknown vessel that had destroyed the Solvang, with the intent to dismantle the Cerritos for parts. The unknown vessel turned out to be a Pakled ship heavily modified with starship parts from over 30 species. Having its port warp nacelle torn away, the Cerritos was powerless to escape or fight back, but Ensign Brad Boimler discovered that the Pakled Clumpship's system could be easily hacked due to its need to accept systems from different species. With the help of his training hologram Badgey, Ensign Sam Rutherford was able to create three viruses that could disable the Pakled Clumpship. Rutherford uploaded one of the viruses into his implant and Lieutenant Shaxs flew them to the Pakled Clumpship using the shuttlecraft Sequoia. While Rutherford downloading the virus to the Pakled Clumpship's computer, Badgey triggered the auto-destruct of the ship, intending to kill Rutherford, as the latter had snapped Badgey's neck when the holo-program malfunctioned last time. Seeing no other options, Shaxs ripped out Rutherford's implant, placed him on the Sequoia, and pushed the shuttlecraft back into space, saving Rutherford but sacrificing himself as the ship exploded.

Freed from the Pakled Clumpship, the Cerritos restored its main power and attempted to fly away, but was soon captured by another three newly arrived Pakled Clumpships. Just as Ensign Beckett Mariner, taking command of the Cerritos, saw no option left but to abandon ship, the USS Titan arrived and immediately opened fire on the Pakled Clumpships, forcing their retreat and saving the Cerritos. Later, arriving back at a starbase, the Cerritos underwent extensive repairs as its crew mourned the loss of Shaxs. (LD: "No Small Parts")


==== 2381 ====
In 2381, while on a long warp trip, the Cerritos was attacked by the Pakled Clumpship Pakled and the Klingon Bird-of-Prey IKS Che'Ta'. The Klingon captain Dorg had been supplying the Pakleds with weapons and intelligence as part of a conspiracy to destabilize the Federation and the Cerritos was nearly destroyed by the two ships. The arrival of the Vulcan cruiser VCF Sh'vhal, armed with experimental shield improvements designed by junior officer T'Lyn, turned the tide of the battle in the Federation's favor. Appalled by his commander's dishonorable tactics, young Klingon officer Ma'ah challenged Dorg for leadership and slew him in single combat before removing the Che'Ta' from the fight. The Cerritos and the Sh'vhal were then able to force the Pakleds into retreat. (LD: "wej Duj")
The Cerritos was assigned to help the USS Archimedes in the other ship's first contact mission to Lapeeria, although the Cerritos hung back at first to not overwhelm the population with the arrival of two ships at once. During this time, Captain Carol Freeman was getting a transfer and a new ship, although she would not be allowed to take the Cerritos' senior staff with her, causing tension amongst the crew only worsened by the news that the next captain would be someone new rather than one of the ship's officers being promoted to take Freeman's place. However, the crew rallied together to save the Archimedes after the other ship fell into trouble due to an unexpected solar flare. At Ensign Sam Rutherford's suggestion, the crew ejected the outer hull to safely pass through a debris field. Commander Jack Ransom piloted the ship using the manual steering column, a heads-up display in his faceplate and Beckett Mariner and Jennifer Sh'reyan calling out directions. The battered Cerritos made it through the debris field just in time to save the Archimedes using its tractor beam, pulling the other ship into a stable orbit.
Afterward, the grateful Captain Sonya Gomez allowed the Cerritos to handle first contact with the Lapeerians rather than the Archimedes which was the first time that the Cerritos had ever made first contact on behalf of Starfleet. Freeman decided to turn down the transfer, only to be arrested for conspiring with Klingon extremists to destroy Pakled Planet. (LD: "First First Contact")
The Cerritos was held in drydock following Freeman's arrest. Convinced that her mother would be used as a scapegoat to appease people due to her role as a California-class captain, Mariner convinced Boimler, Rutherford, and Tendi to sneak on board to find proof of Freeman's innocence. When personal logs from Boimler proved shaky at best, Mariner decided the best thing to do was to hijack the Cerritos in search of the Klingons who were working with the Pakleds. Her attempt proved futile as her actions led to security discovering the ship leaving, her friends stopping Mariner, and Freeman herself returning, having been cleared of all charges by an investigation by Starfleet. (LD: "Grounded")
The Cerritos was assigned to help the USS Vancouver in conducting post-Dominion War trade negotiations with the Karemma on Deep Space 9. However, after the Vancouver was unexpectedly rerouted to the Hasparga system to aid in the evacuation of a colony threatened by a brown hole – something that supposedly didn't exist – the Cerritos was forced to handle the negotiations by itself. Negotiations nearly broke down when Quark was apparently kidnapped by the Karemma, but it later came to light that they were arresting him for stealing some of their technology which Quark had used to create the Quark 2000. Freeman was able to negotiate a deal with the Karemma who resumed trade relations with the Federation. (LD: "Hear All, Trust Nothing")
The Cerritos later received a distress call from AWOL former crewmember Peanut Hamper who had managed to make her way to Areolus following the Battle of Kalla. In violation of the Prime Directive, Peanut Hamper had been providing the pre-warp civilization with advanced technology, forcing the Cerritos to make hasty first contact amidst an attack by the Drookmani. It was discovered that Peanut Hamper had called the Drookmani to make herself look like a hero to Starfleet and get rescued. Hijacking a small Areore ship that was abandoned on the planet from when the Areore were a spacefaring race, the Drookmani attacked the Cerritos which was unable to counter the ship's powerful weapons. However, Rawda reactivated a larger ship and saved the Cerritos. With Peanut Hamper threatening to call the Borg, the Cerritos crew took their wayward former ensign into custody and transferred her to the Self-Aware Megalomaniacal Computer Storage at the Daystrom Institute on Earth. (LD: "A Mathematically Perfect Redemption")
Freeman's proposed Project Swing By was eventually approved by Vice Admiral Les Buenamigo, sending the Cerritos to check up on the Ornaran and Brekkians whom the USS Enterprise-D had made first contact with seventeen years earlier. However, Brekka had been invaded by the Breen, resulting in three Breen interceptors attacking and nearly destroying the Cerritos. The Cerritos was saved by the intervention of the automated Texas-class USS Aledo. The disastrous Breen encounter and a subsequent PR disaster due to Freeman mishandling the presence of a reporter that was sent aboard the ship to do an exposé led to Starfleet Command deciding to decommission the entire California-class. Mariner resigned from Starfleet entirely because she had been unfairly transferred to Starbase 80 over an unauthorized but entirely positive interview with the reporter. Unbeknownst to anyone else, Buenamigo had set the Cerritos up, having been aware of the Breen invasion ahead of time, to have an excuse to unveil the Texas-class. (LD: "Trusted Sources", "The Stars At Night")
In an attempt to stop this, Freeman hastily proposed a second contact race, pitting the Cerritos against the Aledo. Although the Aledo technically won, it did so by violating the Prime Directive, giving Freeman a chance to disqualify it. However, Ensign Sam Rutherford realized that the artificial intelligence used in the Texas-class was dangerously emotionally unstable and prone to patricidal impulses and rushed to Freeman's ready room to warn her, forcing Buenamigo to admit his scheme. Buenamigo responded to this turn of events by granting the Aledo full autonomy, against Rutherford's explicit warning, with the intent of having the Cerritos destroyed under the guise of the Cerritos having attacked the Aledo first in response to losing the race. Once given full autonomy, the Aledo turned on and murdered Buenamigo, then proceeded to attack Douglas Station and activate its sister ships the USS Dallas and USS Corpus Christi. With the three ships dealing horrific damage to both Douglas Station and the USS Van Citters, the Cerritos led the three away and destroyed the Dallas and Corpus Christi by using the warp core as a mine, but the Aledo survived, inflicting severe damage upon the Cerritos. However, Mariner, who had seen an FNN report on the attack, returned with the Free Spirit and the entire fleet of California-class ships who came to the Cerritos' defense, destroying the Aledo. After the battle, the Cerritos returned to Douglas Station for repairs, the reputation of the California-class was restored, and Mariner rescinded her resignation and was reinstated on board the Cerritos. (LD: "The Stars At Night")
The Cerritos visited Krulmuth-B to take readings of the time portal there. However, this resulted in Boimler and later Mariner accidentally getting sent back in time to 2259 where they became stranded. With the help of the crew of the USS Enterprise, Boimler and Mariner eventually returned to their own time and the Cerritos. (SNW: "Those Old Scientists")
The Cerritos was later tasked with bringing the USS Voyager, now decommissioned and transformed into a museum ship, from the Portelo system to Earth where it would temporarily be displayed at Starfleet Command in San Francisco before being permanently placed in orbit. However, an accident led to several Cerritos crewmembers getting "Tuvixed" before Ensigns D'Vana Tendi and T'Lyn found a solution. Afterward, several of the ship's junior officers received promotions to Lieutenant junior grade. (LD: "Twovix")
The Cerritos was assigned to help Admiral Vassery in talks with Grand Nagus Rom to have the Ferengi Alliance join the United Federation of Planets. After Freeman conned Rom, thus proving that the Federation respected Ferengi culture, Rom signed the original version of the formal membership application, officially taking the first step towards joining the Federation. (LD: "Parth Ferengi's Heart Place")
Later that year, the Cerritos was assigned to take Nick Locarno into protective custody when Starfleet believed that the pilot of a mysterious ship stealing non-Federation ships was targeting him, and sent an away team to New Axton to search for him. However, when they reached his hangar, they found him long gone, and Rutherford discovered blueprints for the mysterious ship, meaning Locarno himself was the pilot.
Meanwhile, a separate away team was sent on the Death Valley to a weather satellite orbiting Sherbal V to separate Mariner from the search for Locarno due to an escalating mental health crisis caused by her recent promotion. However, the Death Valley was attacked and destroyed by the IKS Che'Ta', stranding the away team on Sherbal V, where they discovered the command crews of the ships stolen by the mysterious ship. After a talk with Ma'ah, one of the stranded captains, helped Mariner come to terms with the issues causing her crisis, she rallied the crews together, only to be abducted by Locarno around the time the New Axton away team discovered Locarno's involvement in the thefts. (LD: "The Inner Fight")
During the subsequent Nova Fleet crisis, the Cerritos command crew left the ship to rescue Mariner in the captain's yacht, leaving Boimler as the acting captain. Under Boimler's command, the Cerritos was able to open a hole in Nova Fleet's Trynar shield for the captain's yacht to get through. (LD: "Old Friends, New Planets")


==== 2382 ====
In 2382, the Cerritos was assigned to close quantum fissures that kept mysteriously opening up. This resulted in the ship accidentally crossing into a different quantum reality which had only a .357 variance between each other. The two versions of the Cerritos worked together to send the prime universe ship home, although not before the alternate Mariner tried to trade places with the prime Mariner. (LD: "Dos Cerritos")
The Cerritos was later sent to investigate a nanite infestation of the Cosmic Duchess, finding the AWOL Admiral Milius on the resort. The cause of the infestation proved to be the USS Endeavour, an Intrepid-class starship from another reality that had gotten sucked through another fissure and trapped in the prime universe. (LD: "The Best Exotic Nanite Hotel")
While Boimler and Mariner investigated a quantum fissure in Klingon space, the Cerritos brought Doctor Gabers Migleemo to Praxon IV to meet with two renowned food critics, Legnog and Gonald. The ship's replicators were eventually given a two-star review by Legnog and Gonald while Boimler and Mariner's mission discovered that the recent quantum fissures were all manmade rather than natural occurrences. (LD: "A Farewell To Farms")
Following an away mission to the ocean planet Piskes IX, the Cerritos experienced navigation issues and was forced to visit Starbase 80, the worst starbase in the quadrant, for repairs. During this time, most of the crew fell victim to an anaphasic lifeform and were left in a zombie-like state. The lifeform, Clem, was eventually discovered to have possessed Cetacean Ops officer Lieutenant Matt during the Piskes IX mission and was also the source of the ship's navigation problems. Having never intended any harm with his actions, Clem was allowed to remain on Starbase 80 by Commander Kassia Nox. Having gained a new appreciation for the infamous starbase, the Cerritos crew helped the station's personnel to effect some much-needed repairs. (LD: "Starbase 80?!")
The Cerritos later held peace talks between the Cubes and Orbs, complicated by new crewmember and Greek demigod Ensign Olly. After the crisis was resolved, Olly was reassigned to engineering due to her talents. (LD: "Of Gods and Angles")
The Cerritos continued sealing quantum fissures, being sent to close three in just one week with Commander Jack Ransom noting that the crew was getting pretty good at it. However, while dealing with a rift near Dilmer III, the Cerritos discovered that the USS Enterprise-D from another universe where everything was purple had left behind Lieutenant Commander Data who crashed on the planet which had a pre-industrial civilization. An away team from the Cerritos recovered Data's head, but a transporter malfunction and time dilation resulted in the team being trapped on the planet for a year of relative time. Afterward, at Data's recommendation, Tendi and T'Lyn were jointly promoted to senior science officer, and the Cerritos launched Data's head back through the rift to be recovered by the Enterprise before closing the rift. (LD: "Fully Dilated")
On Halloween, the Cerritos faced an invasion by the Clickets who were seeking to use the buhgoon to develop cloaking technology for themselves. However, the Clickets were defeated when Freeman used their aversion to compliments to drive them away. (LD: "Upper Decks")
Shortly thereafter, Boimler received a message from his transporter duplicate William Boimler who had faked his death and joined Section 31. Having discovered the source of the rifts, William warned his counterpart that the prime universe faced destruction from a soliton wave created by the destruction of the USS Beagle if a way couldn't be found to stop it. With the wave threatening the entire multiverse with destruction, William had directed it to the prime universe in the belief that Boimler and the Cerritos crew could find a solution in time. (LD: "Fissure Quest")
Although the USS Enterprise-E was sent to deal with the threat, there wasn't enough time, and with the two Boimlers linked in ways that no one understood, the Cerritos was dispatched to close the rift. The Schrödinger possibility field near the rift caused the Cerritos to change into several different quantum reality versions of itself, including a Freedom-class Cerritos, the mirror universe ISS Cerritos, a Sovereign-class Cerritos, an Oberth-class Cerritos, a Galaxy-class Cerritos, and a Miranda-class Cerritos before finally being returned to normal. In the midst of this, the Cerritos came under attack by Relga who was seeking revenge upon Ma'ah and Malor, but after Olly drained the Klingon shields, the effects of the rift destroyed Relga's ship. Rutherford was able to route the rift's energy into the Cerritos' dilithium chamber to give the ship a power boost but at the cost of the ship splitting into two quantum possibilities with split systems that were trying to control the other. However, working together, Tendi and T'Lyn were able to merge the ship back together. Although the Cerritos was unable to close the rift, Mariner was able to build a dam to contain the energy at the cost of the rift being left permanently open.

Alongside several other ships, including the Enterprise and the USS Titan, the Cerritos subsequently towed Starbase 80 to the rift where the legendary starbase would serve as the headquarters for a new mission to explore the multiverse. Captain Freeman was transferred off of the Cerritos to Starbase 80 to oversee the new mission alongside her husband, Admiral Alonzo Freeman. (LD: "The New Next Generation")


=== Jack Ransom's command ===
Following Captain Freeman's reassignment to Starbase 80, Ransom was promoted to Captain and was tasked by Starfleet to investigate some talking goo on Snickmik V. He also decided to pick Boimler and Mariner as his joint provisional first officers, noting that he may eventually promote one of them to the official solo position. (LD: "The New Next Generation")


== List of contacts ==


=== First contacts ===
Lapeerians (2381)
Areore (2381)
Dilmerians (2382)


=== Second contacts ===
Galardonians (2380)
Betans (2380)
Apergosians (2381)
Ornarans (2381)
Brekkians (2381)


== Legacy ==
Despite only being a California-class starship, the Cerritos gained a considerable reputation amongst other ships, particularly in the 2380s. Having been a staple presence in numerous encounters with the Pakleds, and her other adventurous endeavors under Captain Freeman, the Cerritos gained favorable recognition amongst other ships of Starfleet. Despite this, her command crew was not invited to the Command Conference of Starbase 25 since it was not a capital ship. (LD: "An Embarrassment Of Dooplers")
In 2381, Ensign Kearns of the USS Carlsbad called the Cerritos the Enterprise of support ships. (LD: "Mining The Mind's Mines")
In 2384, The Doctor, while talking about Dal R'El and his friends, mused that he hadn't seen a crew that dysfunctional since the Cerritos. (PRO: "Observer's Paradox")


== Technical data ==


=== Crew quarter assignments ===
Deck 9: Barnes
Deck 11:
A12001: Beckett Mariner
A12002: Sam Rutherford
A12003: Brad Boimler
A12004: D'Vana Tendi
A12005:
Alien operations ensign
Human ops ensign
A12007:
Human sciences ensign
Andorian ops ensign
Human sciences ensign
Fletcher
A12011: Human operations ensign
A12027: Alien operations ensign
A13005: Asif
A13007: Karavitus
A13009: Amadou
A13011: Moxy


=== Embarked craft ===
The Cerritos carried a complement of Type 6A shuttlecraft, all named after 21st-century national parks in California, in its shuttlebay. (LD: "Second Contact", "Envoys")


== Command crew ==
Commanding officer
Carol Freeman (c. 2380–2382)
Amina Ramsey (2380)
Brad Boimler (2381) (acting)
Jack Ransom (2382–)
First officer
Jack Ransom (c. 2380–2382)
Beckett Mariner (2380) (acting); (2382–) (provisional)
Brad Boimler (2382–) (provisional)
Chief engineer
Andy Billups (c. 2380–)
Chief medical officer
T'Ana (c. 2380–)
Ship's Counselor
Gabers Migleemo (c. 2380–)
Tactical officer
Shaxs (–2380, 2381–)
Kayshon (2381–)
Flight control officer
Casey (2380–)
Brad Boimler (2380–)
Beckett Mariner (2380–)
Jennifer Sh'reyan (2381)
Wendy (2381)
Operations officer
Barnes (2380–)
Beckett Mariner (2380–2381)
Andy Billups (2380) (acting)
Sam Rutherford (2381)
Science officer
D'Vana Tendi (2382–)
T'Lyn (2382–)


=== See also ===
USS Cerritos personnel
Unnamed USS Cerritos personnel


== Alternate reality configurations ==
In an alternate reality visited by the prime Cerritos in 2382, the Cerritos was under the command of Captain Becky Freeman after Captain Carol Freeman was reassigned to Starbase 80. The Cerritos became a shell of its former self as Becky Freeman was a despot who constantly punished her subordinates. According to King Billups, this version of the Cerritos was "mostly brigs", enabling Becky to imprison a large number of people. Another notable difference between this Cerritos and the prime Cerritos was that its LCARS displays were colored light and dark blue, rather than yellow and orange. Conversely, the lights behind the alternate Cerritos' transporter platform were yellow instead of blue. (LD: "Dos Cerritos")
In another alternate reality, Mariner served as an engineer aboard a Cerritos which was investigating the quantum fissures that kept opening up when Mariner fell through one and was rescued by the Anaximander. The data on the rifts collected by this Cerritos helped the Anaximander to find the source of the rifts. (LD: "Fissure Quest")
In one quantum reality, D'Vana Tendi was the sole senior science officer, while in another, T'Lyn was the sole senior science officer. (LD: "The New Next Generation")
In 2382, while within a Schrödinger possibility field, the prime universe's Cerritos was briefly transformed into multiple different configurations from multiple different realities. (LD: "The New Next Generation")


=== Mirror universe ===

One of the different configurations encountered was the Terran ISS Cerritos. In comparison to the Prime configurations, the ISS Cerritos carries more weaponry, including a pair of prominent weapons pods on top of the saucer, additional phaser banks, and two mission pods on the rollbar structure, one above the main saucer and one above the secondary hull, in addition to two Sovereign-class style nacelles.


=== Freedom-class ===

At least two variants were encountered, that were identified as a Freedom-class. One variant featured gold-colored hull accents, and one variant featured darker-colored hull accents. Each variant featured a single warp nacelle connected to the saucer sections by two underslung pylons. The ship's main navigational deflector was connected directly to the underside of the saucer.


=== Galaxy-class ===

A Galaxy-class variant was encountered, with this variant featuring color accented nacelles, and accent striping along the saucer section, but otherwise appeared identical to the prime Galaxy-class configuration.


=== Sovereign-class ===

A single Sovereign-class configuration was encountered, with this design retaining the prime California-class's original nacelles. Specialty-colored accents were displayed along the saucer section. This variant stood in stark contrast with Captain Carol Freeman's remarks on starship repairs coming out "looking all Sovereign-class".


=== Oberth-class ===

An Oberth-class variant was encountered and appeared similar to the prime universe configuration, however, accent coloring was displayed on the underside of the saucer.


=== Miranda-class ===

At least two Miranda-class variants were encountered. Relatively unchanged from the prime universe configurations, these two featured the California-class' original nacelles and color accents displayed on the bottom saucer section.