The USS Ajax (NCC-11574) was a 24th century Federation Apollo-class starship operated by Starfleet. 


== History ==
In 2327, Captain Narth was the commanding officer of the Ajax. Ensign Cortan Zweller was first assigned to the Ajax following his graduation from Starfleet Academy. (TNG: "Tapestry")
In 2364, the Ajax was one of the ships that received Kosinski's experimental warp drive upgrades. The engineering staff reported a measurable increase in performance and engine efficiency following the upgrade. It was later suggested that these enhancements in performance may have been attributed to straightening out simple engine inefficiencies experienced by the older ship. (TNG: "Where No One Has Gone Before")
In 2367, the Ajax was on a deep space exploration mission in Sector 21834. The ship was named on the chart "Starfleet Operations-Sectors 21166-23079" on the USS Enterprise-D bridge. (TNG: "Brothers" okudagram)
In 2368, the Ajax joined Captain Picard's fleet that blockaded the Klingon-Romulan border during the Klingon Civil War. The ship was one of twenty-three assembled for the fleet and was one of the seventeen chosen for the tachyon network. Identified by its name and registry number, the ship's position in the network was monitored from the Enterprise-D. 
When the network was disrupted by a high-energy burst released by the Romulans, the net was no longer effective in a radius of ten million kilometers around the USS Sutherland. Subsequently, Picard ordered the fleet to proceed to Gamma Eridon at maximum warp, where the fleet would attempt to reestablish the net before the Romulans got there. (TNG: "Redemption II", okudagram)
In 2369, the Ajax was on a deep space exploration mission in Sector 21396. The ship was named on the chart "Starfleet Operations-Sectors 21538-23079" in the Enterprise-D observation lounge. (TNG: "Chain Of Command, Part I" okudagram)
In 2364, of the anti-time past, the Ajax was named on a Starship mission status chart in the observation lounge of the Enterprise-D. (TNG: "All Good Things...")