The USS Charleston (NCC-42285) was a Federation Excelsior-class starship operated by Starfleet. 


== History ==
In 2364, the Charleston was en route to Earth and planned to make an extended stop at Arloff IX. The USS Enterprise-D left the Romulan Neutral Zone and planned to meet with the Charleston, which would then transport three Humans from a 20th century space module to Earth. (TNG: "The Neutral Zone")
In 2367, the Charleston was on a deep space exploration mission in Sector 22055. The ship was named on the chart "Starfleet Operations-Sectors 21166-23079" on the Enterprise-D bridge. (TNG: "Brothers" okudagram)
In 2368, the Charleston joined Captain Jean-Luc Picard's fleet that blockaded the Klingon-Romulan border during the Klingon Civil War. The ship was one of twenty-three assembled for the fleet and was one of the seventeen chosen for the tachyon network. Identified by its name and registry number, the ship's position in the network was monitored from the Enterprise-D. 
When the network was disrupted by a high-energy burst released by the Romulans, the net was no longer effective in a radius of ten million kilometers around the USS Sutherland. Subsequently, Picard ordered the fleet to proceed to Gamma Eridon at maximum warp, where the fleet would attempt to reestablish the net before the Romulans got there. (TNG: "Redemption II" okudagram)
In 2369, the Charleston was on a deep space exploration mission in Sector 22853. The ship was named on the chart "Starfleet Operations-Sectors 21538-23079" in the Enterprise-D observation lounge. (TNG: "Chain Of Command, Part I" okudagram)
Later that year, the Charleston was named on the chart "Sector Ipai Relay Log – Relay Message Flow 1293" in Relay Station 47 Ops. This ship sent a message from Sector 89102 on Starfleet Commnet Seven via secure channel. The ship's next assignment was a deep space exploration mission of Sector 22055. (TNG: "Aquiel" production art)
Later that year, the Charleston was again named on the chart "Sector Ipai Relay Log – Relay Message Flow 1293" on Ohniaka III Research Station Ops. (TNG: "Descent", production art)
In 2364, of the anti-time past, the Charleston was named on a Starship Mission Assignments chart in the observation lounge of the Enterprise-D. (TNG: "All Good Things...")