USS Akagi (NCC-62158) was a 24th century Federation starship operated by Starfleet.


== History ==
In 2368, the Akagi joined Captain Jean-Luc Picard's fleet that blockaded the Klingon-Romulan border during the Klingon Civil War. The ship was one of twenty-three assembled for the fleet and was one of the seventeen chosen for the tachyon network. Identified by its name and registry number, the ship's position in the network was monitored from the USS Enterprise-D. 
A plan was hatched by Picard, which he hoped would lure the Romulans through the detection grid. When Gowron launched a full attack against the forces of the House of Duras, the Romulan ships would rush to their aid. During this, the USS Excalibur would fall back with feigned engine troubles, taking the Akagi and the USS Hornet. In doing so, this would open up a small gap in the detection net for the Romulans to attempt to pass through. As their ships passed through the gap, the Enterprise-D and the USS Tian An Men would swing around, close the gap, and catch the Romulans in the act.
The plan was foiled when the network was disrupted by a high-energy burst released by the Romulans, and the net was no longer effective in a radius of ten million kilometers around the USS Sutherland. Subsequently, Picard ordered the fleet to proceed to Gamma Eridon at maximum warp, where the fleet would attempt to reestablish the net before the Romulans got there. (TNG: "Redemption II")
In 2374, Akagi was assigned to the Ninth Fleet, operating in the Bajor sector theater. A week after Operation Return, the ship visited Deep Space 9 along with USS Exeter and USS Sutherland to be resupplied. (DS9: "You Are Cordially Invited")

The starship reported numerous casualties to Starfleet Command. The name of the reporting ship and its registry and the casualties were named on the "Personnel Status Update" chart in the Deep Space 9 wardroom. (DS9: "In the Pale Moonlight" okudagram)


== List of casualties ==
Lt. Matata L. Kimya (MIA)
Lt. Alan M. Kobayashi (MIA)
Ens. Beverly C. Kurts (MIA)
Lt. Jay T. Laprade (MIA)
Ens. Paul F. Lawrence (MIA)
Lcmdr. Kathy S. Leprich (MIA)
Lester P. LeVesconte (MIA)
Lt. (jg) Faith LeVesconte (MIA)
Lt. Rose E. Limli (MIA)
Cmdr. Mindy C. Long (MIA)
Ens. Tom P. Mahoney (MIA)
Ens. Marian A. McAllum (MIA)
Kathy McCammon, RN (MIA)
Lcmdr. Jon S. Monson (KIA)
Cmdr. David P. Nemzek (MIA)
Donna W. Nemzek, RN (MIA)
Ens. Dorit J. Oberman (MIA)
Ens. Lori B. Oberscheven (MIA)
Larry A. Ohlson (MIA)
Nancy B. Ohlson, RN (MIA)
Captain Leslie Wong (MIA)