The Borg Queen was the name of the entity that existed within and served as the queen of the Borg Collective. An ancient being, the Queen has existed for many hundreds of years. (Star Trek: First Contact; PIC: "Surrender") In the event of her body's destruction, she would appear to be reincarnated with her personality and memories intact. (Star Trek: First Contact; VOY: "Dark Frontier", "Unimatrix Zero", "Unimatrix Zero, Part II", "Endgame")
Two decades after suffering catastrophic defeat at the hands of Admiral Janeway, the Borg Queen collaborated with a rogue faction of Changelings to rebuild her collective and take revenge upon the Federation. Her final scheme was thwarted by her old enemy, Jean-Luc Picard, and she was killed once and for all by the USS Enterprise-D, bringing an end to the threat of the Borg. (PIC: "Võx", "The Last Generation")


== Role and personality ==
The Queen defined herself as: "I am the beginning, the end, the one who is many. I am the Borg." As the queen of the Borg Collective and the lone individual within it, the Borg Queen provided direction and purpose for the hive mind. (Star Trek: First Contact; VOY: "Unimatrix Zero", "Unimatrix Zero, Part II", "Endgame"; PIC: "Watcher", "Hide and Seek")
It was thought by Federation exobiologist Erin Hansen that the Borg Queen functioned like the queen of an insect hive, to coordinate the drones. Evidence of this was later seen when the Queen countermanded the Collective's judgment about assimilating Voyager in 2378. While the Collective felt that assimilation was warranted, the Borg Queen countermanded them and justified the decision due to the fact that Voyager didn't compromise their security. (VOY: "Endgame")
The Queen, while providing coordination for the drones she commanded, also provided other functions such as regulation of the Collective's transwarp hubs and interspatial manifolds. She effectively brought "order to chaos" for all things. (VOY: "Endgame")
According to Seven of Nine, "The Borg Queen has a kind of trans-temporal awareness. It bridges into adjacent times, realities. They hear echoes of themselves, of— of each other." (PIC: "Penance")
The death of the Borg Queen, while traumatic to drones in the immediate vicinity, did not seem to permanently affect the Collective or its hive mind as a whole. The Queen was subsequently replicated after each death, although the exact mechanism of her reincarnations remains unclear. Borg drones were capable of functioning without a Queen for any length of time by forming a Hive mind of their own. (Star Trek: First Contact; VOY: "Unity", "Dark Frontier")

In accordance with the Borg pursuit of perfection, a blending of the organic and synthetic, very little of her original humanoid form remained. Her face and upper torso were organic while the rest of her body, including her skull and spinal cord, were synthetic. Because of her disembodiment she saw herself as the epitome of perfection. The Queen had her own chambers within the Borg Unicomplex from which she could oversee and control the Borg via the command interface. Whether she had her own ship or not is unknown, but she used different Borg vessels to travel, such as a Borg cube, sphere, or octahedron. When her physical presence was not necessary, her organic head above her chamber while her synthetic torso was stored below it, under the floor. If she desired, the two could be combined, creating a humanoid form for herself.

Where her drones showed no emotions, the Queen herself did. She was ruthless, vindictive, petty, and selfish. She would do anything to expand the Borg Collective, employing psychological tactics like extortion, manipulation, plain intimidation or even seduction to further her goals. The Queen placed her own self-preservation over that of the Collective, cannibalizing the bodies of her last remaining drones to keep herself alive after the collapse of the hive. On a personal level, she considered Seven of Nine her favorite drone, because the Queen considered her to be unique. (VOY: "Unimatrix Zero", "Dark Frontier")
Despite being one with the minds of billions, the Queen felt a sense of profound isolation and loneliness. Her inexorable drive to assimilate was partially motivated by a desire for connection. With millions of species not enough to sate her, she attempted to fill this void by grooming potential counterparts that were more than mere drones. Jean-Luc Picard, Data, Seven of Nine, and Agnes Jurati were all such candidates. (Star Trek: First Contact; VOY: "Dark Frontier"; PIC: "Hide and Seek")
Following the decimation of the Borg Collective, the Borg Queen succumbed to desperation and insanity from the isolation she endured. Nevertheless, she retained her intellect and tactical mind, working with the rogue Changelings from behind the scenes to execute her plans for a Borg resurgence. (PIC: "Võx", "The Last Generation")


== History ==


=== Origin ===
The Borg Queen (or perhaps merely one of her bodies) was assimilated to the Collective from Species 125 around the age of 7-8, along with her parents, and was already active in the Delta Quadrant in 2354. (VOY: "Unimatrix Zero, Part II")


=== Attacks on Earth ===
The existence of the Borg Queen was documented sometime prior to 2365 by the exobiologists Erin and Magnus Hansen. However, because the Hansens were assimilated, their discovery never reached the Federation. (VOY: "The Raven")
It was not until 2373, that the Federation became aware of her when the Federation starship USS Enterprise-E prevented the assimilation of Earth. This was the second attempt by the Borg, also known as the Battle of Sector 001. The Borg Queen, along with a contingent of drones, traveled back to Earth's past to prevent First Contact, and by doing so, hoped to be able to assimilate Earth.

During this conflict, while Captain Jean-Luc Picard was trying to destroy the Borg, the Queen claimed to have been present during the Battle of Wolf 359, and even admitted that Locutus of Borg – the assimilated Picard – was intended to be a singular intelligence – a counterpart that was intended to ease the burden of loneliness. However, when Picard continued to resist, even when he could not control Locutus' body, she was regretfully forced to turn him into the form in which Starfleet encountered him—a glorified drone. Whether or not she physically took part in the Battle of Wolf 359 was unknown.
Picard and Data killed the Borg Queen after she tried to persuade Data to give her the encryption code by which he had locked the Enterprise's computer. She ordered Data to destroy the Phoenix spaceship with quantum torpedoes, and taunted Picard that she would rule Earth without Humans or the Federation in it, when the torpedoes missed. Data told her, "Resistance is futile!" and vented the warp core plasma coolant, which destroyed her organic parts. Picard then broke her cybernetic spinal cord, which ensured that she could no longer function. (Star Trek: First Contact)
In 2399, Picard mentally recalled the image of the Borg Queen and Locutus while aboard The Artifact. (PIC: "The Impossible Box")
As of 2401, the remains of this incarnation of the Queen were stored at Daystrom Station. (PIC: "The Bounty")


=== Conflicts with Voyager ===
Starfleet's second documented encounter with the Borg Queen was in 2375 in the Delta Quadrant. Here, the lost Federation starship USS Voyager, tried to rescue the former Borg Drone, Seven of Nine, who was then part of Voyager's crew, when the plan to steal a transwarp coil from a Borg sphere did not work out as planned. The Queen also revealed that Seven of Nine was not really freed by Voyager from the Collective, but was allowed to leave by the Borg. During this encounter, the Borg Queen hoped to assimilate Seven of Nine again, who experienced life as an individual for two years, and by doing so, add to her own perfection. However, Seven rejected the Queen and fled with a rescue mission sent by Voyager in the Delta Flyer. The Borg Queen's octahedron was sent by the Queen to intercept the shuttle, but it was destroyed in the attempt. (VOY: "Dark Frontier")
The Borg Queen was one of several real people who was adapted into a character in Kelis' play, based on descriptions from B'Elanna Torres. (VOY: "Muse")
In 2376 and 2377, the Borg Queen was again encountered by Voyager. This time the Queen wanted to destroy Unimatrix Zero, a virtual world that was populated by regenerating Borg with a genetic mutation. This world was discovered by Seven of Nine and posed a threat to the Borg. During Voyager's efforts to rescue this virtual world, the Borg Queen demonstrated her powers by destroying a Borg sphere because she could no longer "hear" only one drone. When a nanovirus was released to prevent the detection of Unimatrix Zero, the Queen destroyed several Borg vessels, and killed 75,000 Borg Drones in the process, in the hope of persuading the captured Captain Janeway to give her the antidote. (VOY: "Unimatrix Zero", "Unimatrix Zero, Part II")

The last encounter between Voyager and the Borg Queen was in 2378. Voyager accidentally discovered a Borg transwarp hub within a nebula and were helped by Admiral Kathryn Janeway, who came from an alternate timeline around twenty-six years in the future, to use the Borg transwarp network to get back to the Alpha Quadrant. Because the Borg guarded their transwarp hub closely, Admiral Janeway devised a plan by which she would infect the Borg Queen with a neurolytic pathogen and in doing so make her lose control over the force fields which protected the interspatial manifolds. When the admiral was captured by the Borg, near the Unicomplex, she was assimilated by the Borg Queen herself. Soon after, the Queen began to lose control over her drones.  The pathogen even made her lose control over her own synthetic parts, as her body literally fell apart. Her death caused the destruction of the Unicomplex and despite her efforts, Voyager reached Earth safely. The Borg sphere that was sent after them by the Queen was destroyed by Voyager's transphasic torpedoes, which were given to them by Admiral Janeway from the future. (VOY: "Endgame")


=== Alliance with the Changelings ===
Despite the peace brokered between Jurati's Borg and Starfleet, the original Collective remained hostile, and set in motion a plan to assimilate Starfleet from within. The Collective had slowly dwindled following the neurolytic pathogen infection from Admiral Janeway. The Queen managed to survive by cannibalizing parts of her drones, though without the ability to assimilate new drones into the Collective, the Queen was eventually left alone as her drones died of starvation and old age which apparently drove her insane.

As those voices fell silent, the Queen began to hear a new voice - that of Jack Crusher, the son of Jean-Luc Picard and carrier of a transmitter protein inherited from his father's Borg-altered DNA. She realized that the future of the Borg no longer lay in assimilation, but in evolution, propagation, and the annihilation of all other life forms in the galaxy. Over the years, the Queen communicated with Jack, intending to lure him to her. Jack believed the voice was that of his mother.

In order to enact her plan, the Borg Queen made a deal with rogue Changelings, led by Vadic sometime leading up to 2401. The Changelings, who were vengeful themselves for what had happened to them in the Dominion War, agreed to help by stealing Jean-Luc Picard's body from Daystrom Station in order to extract his Borg DNA and spread it through Starfleet's transporter system as common biology. They would also hunt Jack Crusher with the intent of bringing him to the Borg Queen. (PIC: "The Last Generation")
She communicated with Vadic via Vadic's severed hand, with which the Borg Queen formed a simulacrum of a face in mid-air.
Vadic reported that the USS Titan-A, carrying their "asset" Jack Crusher, had fallen into the gravity well at the center of the Ryton Nebula, where her ship the Shrike could not follow due to its portal weapon. The Borg Queen ordered Vadic to pursue regardless, stating that everything, including her and her crew, was expendable. (PIC: "No Win Scenario")
After capturing and interrogating William T. Riker and Deanna Troi but failing to gain any information, Vadic contacted the Borg Queen again to report that they would not break. The Borg Queen demanded that she try harder to break them, and noted that Vadic's physiology was not as special or complex as she believed. She stated that the Changelings' nature was to be malleable, while the enemy's kind were "beholden to a singular flesh." The Borg Queen then reiterated that Starfleet's fallure was near and she needed Jack Crusher, but warned that should Vadic fail, the Changelings' existence would become "meaningless." (PIC: "Dominion")
After Jack became aware of his true nature, he sought out the Borg Queen, with the intention of killing her. Arriving aboard her makeshift mega-cube in the atmosphere of Jupiter, the Queen welcomed Jack, telling him that she had "thought of so many names" for him – "Regenerati. Peur Dei." Jack rejected these names, and the Borg Queen responded that he was Võx, not Locutus, "the one that speaks". Jack was "the voice itself". Boarding the cube to confront her, Jack raised his phaser but was unable to kill the Borg Queen, who mocked him for his inability. She then assimilated Jack and used him to broadcast a signal to all affected Starfleet personnel, triggering the last stage of their assimilation. (PIC: "Võx")
The crew of the USS Enterprise-D tracked a Borg signal to Jupiter. Picard, William T. Riker and Worf beamed aboard the Borg vessel to find both Jack and the origin of the signal. Picard separated from Riker and Worf to find Jack, who had already been transformed completely into Võx.
Picard's confrontation with the Queen escalated until Picard reconnected with Jack and convinced Jack to reject the Borg. The Enterprise flew in overhead, and was able to beam them to safety as the Cube exploded from the Enterprise's attack, killing the Queen and ending the Collective once and for all.
Following the Borg Queen's death and the destruction of her Cube, the signal to Starfleet was cut ending the Borg control over it. Admiral Beverly Crusher was subsequently able to find a way to remove the Borg DNA from everyone, ending the Borg Queen's plan permanently. (PIC: "The Last Generation")


== Alternate timeline ==

In 2401, an atypical version of the Borg Queen beckoned Jean-Luc Picard to a region of space, where she expressed a desire to join the Federation. After it seemingly appeared to take over the USS Stargazer, Picard destroyed the ship, rather than to allow it to be assimilated.
Following the destruction of the Stargazer, Picard and other members of the Stargazer crew found themselves in an alternate timeline, created through the intervention of Q. Xenophobic Humans dominated parts of the galaxy, and even managed to defeat the Borg; their immobilized Queen was held by the Confederation of Earth. This Borg Queen, who possessed an awareness of the split in the timeline, was set to be executed by Picard. With her species having been wiped out in this timeline, the Borg Queen agreed to help Picard and his crew travel back in time and correct the timeline.
Though killed by a shotgun blast from Jurati, after arriving in 2024, this Queen had managed to assimilate Dr. Agnes Jurati and live on through Jurati. (PIC: "The Star Gazer", "Penance", "Mercy", "Farewell")

See: Agnes Jurati, Borg Queen


== Hologram ==

A hologram of the Borg Queen appeared in Starfleet's Borg Encounter holographic training drill, in use by 2381. In the simulation, it was possible for the user to beat the Queen at chess and teach her empathy to improve their score. (LD: "I, Excretus")