"Locutus of Borg" was the Borg designation forced upon Starfleet captain Jean-Luc Picard after his assimilation in late 2366.


== History ==

The Borg intended to use Picard as an intermediary, a spokesman for the Human race, in order to facilitate the assimilation of Earth so that the process would be as quick and efficient (or as perfect, from the perspective of the Borg Collective) as possible, with the fewest number of casualties on both sides. He may have had some form of individuality, as shown by his use of the pronoun "I". (TNG: "The Best of Both Worlds") Given the Borg Queen's vested interest in Picard's integration into Locutus and her interest in him becoming her equal among the Borg, he may have been granted greater independence. (Star Trek: First Contact)

Picard's assimilation allowed the Borg to acquire the whole of his knowledge and experience, as well as his own personal history, a fact that was made apparent when Locutus addressed Commander Riker as "Number one". Picard's comprehensive awareness of Federation technology and strategy yielded the Borg a significant tactical advantage when Starfleet confronted the Borg cube at Wolf 359. (TNG: "The Best of Both Worlds, Part II"; DS9: "Emissary")

This access proved two-way, however, as the crew of the USS Enterprise-D was able to capture Locutus and use his link to disable and destroy the Borg vessel by sending the Borg cube a command to regenerate, which created a feedback loop that destroyed the cube and severed Picard's link to the Collective. (TNG: "The Best of Both Worlds, Part II")


== Legacy ==
Though his implants were removed and his wounds were allowed to heal, Picard's assimilation continued to haunt him. He returned to Earth, and paid a visit to his family in La Barre, France, where he eventually came to terms with the ordeal following discussions with his brother. (TNG: "Family") 
Although he returned to duty, Picard continued to process the trauma of his assimilation and the battle of Wolf 359 for decades, with it nearly overwhelming him when he visited the Artifact. (PIC: "The Impossible Box")
Despite his separation from the Collective, Borg drones that had never encountered Locutus, such as Third of Five, still referred to Picard using this name, due to Locutus' experiences remaining within the shared Hive mind. (TNG: "I Borg", "Descent")
When Benjamin Sisko made contact with the Prophets in 2369, one took the form of Locutus as he appeared on the viewscreen of Sisko's ship, the USS Saratoga, shortly before the Battle of Wolf 359. (DS9: "Emissary")
When the Borg attempted a second invasion in 2373, Picard's experience with the Borg not only gave him prior warning of the attack, but also allowed him to pinpoint a weakness in the Borg defenses, which resulted in the fleet destroying the invading vessel. In the process, Picard displayed a residual link to the Collective even without Locutus' implants. (Star Trek: First Contact)
In 2374, when Captain Kathryn Janeway was conducting negotiations with the Borg during the Borg-Species 8472 War, she requested to speak to an individual, and cited to the Borg: "You've done it before, when you transformed Jean-Luc Picard into Locutus." The Borg ultimately complied by sending Seven of Nine to Janeway. (VOY: "Scorpion, Part II")

When Picard went to the Artifact in 2399, looking to find Soji Asha, he ran a computer search. One of the images that came up was of Locutus, which Picard reacted to by placing his hand on his own face, where the Borg implants had once been. Once he reached the Artifact, Picard began to experience anxiety from seeing the Borg architecture, thus experiencing vivid memories of his time as Locutus, recalling individuals such as the Borg Queen. He almost fell over until he was aided by several former drones. Hugh, who had accompanied the former drones then reassured Picard that he was no longer Locutus. Nevertheless, one of the former drones there later recognized him as such, (PIC: "The Impossible Box") as did the Borg Queen in the Confederation of Earth timeline. (PIC: "Penance", "Assimilation")
In 2401, it was discovered that what was believed to have been Irumodic Syndrome and a defect in Picard's brain was actually a result of genetic alterations that the Borg made while Picard was Locutus of Borg, alterations that went beyond even what a normal Borg drone received. These alterations made Picard a receiver for the Borg Collective, resulting in Picard maintaining a residual link with the Borg even without Locutus' implants. This alteration was also inherited by Picard's son Jack Crusher, although he became a transmitter rather than a receiver. By taking Picard's Borg-altered DNA and placing it into the transporter systems of Starfleet, the Changelings were able to compromise Starfleet, allowing the Borg to begin a takeover of the Federation from the inside. (PIC: "Võx")
After reuniting with Picard on a Borg cube over Jupiter, the Borg Queen referred to Picard as Locutus, but was no longer interested in returning Picard to Locutus as she now sought to make the Borg evolve, propagate and wipe out all other lifeforms in the galaxy. When Picard linked back into the Collective in an effort to save Jack, he experienced the same flashbacks of himself as Locutus that he had once seen just prior to the Battle of Sector 001. (PIC: "The Last Generation")