Bo'rak was a Klingon Intelligence operative who lived during the late 24th century. 
Bo'rak, along with his two companions Atul and Morka, arrived at Deep Space 9 in 2371 aboard a freighter, under the guise that their ship's main computer required a complete overhaul. 
Shortly after their arrival, Odo arrested Bo'rak for public drunkenness, where after, Commander Benjamin Sisko requested that Odo keep a close eye on them, as there was to be a Romulan delegation on the station at the same time. 
Some time later, Quark complained to Miles O'Brien that the Klingons destroyed two of his holosuites. When O'Brien told him he should know better, Quark remarked that "they're paying me double." Quark, nevertheless, allowed them back into his holosuites (as they offered to pay Quark triple), while promising the station personnel he would not let them into the bar so as to avoid any confrontations with the Romulans. 
Five hours later, they emerged from the holosuite and Bo'rak proclaimed his satisfaction with "the warrior's program" they just experienced. Bo'rak and Mokra quickly encountered the Romulans after they entered the bar, when Bo'rak suggested that "Maybe someone should show them the way out..."
When their true identity was eventually discovered, they were arrested by Odo, who revealed that they were sent by Chancellor Gowron as a covert strike force, there to observe the Romulan delegation. After Sisko felt that he had enough evidence to hold the Klingons for questioning, all three were arrested.
While in the holding cell, Bo'rak warned that "We will have our vengeance on all of you for this!" When Odo finally revealed to the trio that he was aware of their identity, he threatened to inform Klingon Intelligence of their failed mission. Knowing the jig was up, they backed down, leaving Odo to offer to them that "if you should suddenly feel like cooperating with us, I may be persuaded to let you go without contacting your friends in Intelligence. Maybe." (DS9: "Visionary")