Captain Dorg was a male Klingon who was the commanding officer of the IKS Che'Ta', and the "puppet master" behind the Pakled attacks on the Federation from late 2380 through 2381. (LD: "wej Duj")
Believing that the Klingon Empire had grown weak and lost its way through its peaceful interactions with the Federation, Dorg sought to destabilize Federation-Klingon relations using the Pakleds as a proxy. Dorg supplied the Pakleds with various Klingon weaponry, and provided Rebner of the Pakled Clumpship Pakled with a Varuvian bomb, for a plan to smuggle the bomb to Earth. However, he was forced to give them another after they tested the first one on a large asteroid in System 7743.8. Dorg took these actions without the approval of the Klingon High Council, believing that they lacked foresight but would support a new war once it began.
Dorg's authority as captain of the Che'Ta' was challenged first by his first officer Togg, then later by his replacement first officer, Ma'ah, who disagreed with Dorg's desire to sabotage peace. After Dorg ordered the Che'Ta' to open fire on the USS Cerritos and the VCF Sh'vhal, Ma'ah killed him to prevent the battle from continuing. Ma'ah then ordered the Che'Ta' to retreat from battle and report back to Qo'noS. (LD: "wej Duj")
In 2382, Dorg's brother Bargh used the mutiny aboard the Che'Ta' to dismiss Ma'ah from his captaincy in retaliation for the death of Dorg and then used his position as the head of the Klingon Oversight Council to keep Ma'ah from appealing his ruling. After Bargh complained that a weakling had killed his brother, Lieutenant junior grade Beckett Mariner suggested that Dorg must've sucked then if he was killed by a weakling. (LD: "A Farewell To Farms")
The dishonorable actions of Dorg and Bargh led to the Klingon High Council seeing their sister Relga as weak. Later that year, Relga sought revenge upon Ma'ah and Malor for the deaths of her brothers, leading her into conflict with the Cerritos. Relga's attempt to get revenge only led to her own death and Ma'ah being given command of her fleet. (LD: "The New Next Generation")