Drekol was a Klingon warrior who lived in the 32nd century. A member of the House of Kraag, he was married to Enok and L'vanna, with whom he had two sons, Thar and Jay-Den. He was an ardent traditionalist who supported the Klingon diaspora's prohibition on alien technology and influence.
Like most of the diaspora, Drekol and his family were itinerant refugees. In 3194, they were encamped in the wilderness of Krios Prime. Drekol crafted a hurwl' for Thar when the latter became a warrior by making a kill in a hunt. On the other hand, he neither understood nor approved of Jay-Den's desire to become a healer.
One day at a trading post, Thar was stabbed by a trader with a poisoned dagger while attempting to acquire a Federation dermal regenerator for Jay-Den. Drekol and Enok managed to drag him back to their camp; Jay-Den insisted that he could save him with the regenerator, but Drekol denied him, and Thar died in their arms.
Drekol subsequently crafted another hurwl' for Jay-Den. The two argued about Jay-Den's request to join Starfleet Academy, with Drekol calling it an insult to their family. He then spotted a Veqlargh toQ and demanded that Jay-Den kill it to honor Thar and prove himself a warrior. Jay-Den refused, stating that he was honoring Thar by doing so. Enraged, Drekol took the bow and shot at the bird himself, but missed his mark. He stormed off, and shortly after he and his spouses departed the planet in their ship, leaving Jay-Den behind.
In 3195, Drekol, Enok, and L'vanna were among those headed for a refugee camp on Taurus VII when their heavy cargo carrier suffered a critical mechanical failure and crashed. The three were found alive and brought to the new Klingon homeworld of Faan Alpha.
Though Jay-Den did join the Academy, he continued to believe that he had dishonored his House by causing his father such anger as to abandon him. However, Lura Thok assured him that anger would not have caused Drekol to miss the bird. She suggested that Drekol had intentionally missed so as to, in the only way he knew how, concede victory to Jay-Den and free him to follow his own path. (SA: "Vox In Excelso")