Gorkon was the Chancellor of the Klingon High Council in 2293. In this capacity, he notably pursued peaceful relations between the Klingon Empire and the United Federation of Planets. However, he was assassinated just prior to the start of the Khitomer Conference. Only a full explanation of a conspiracy behind his death allowed for successful negotiation of the Khitomer Accords, which eventually normalized relations between the two governments after years of hostility.


== Biographical record ==
In 2293, the destruction of the Klingon moon Praxis forced the Klingon Empire to reassess its position towards the United Federation of Planets, as the Empire simply could no longer afford to maintain its massive military budget and deal with the devastating effects of the explosion on its economy. Gorkon approached the Federation via Captain Spock and opened negotiations that would see the military outposts on both sides of the Klingon Neutral Zone dismantled and a new alliance forged between the two cold war enemies.
Gorkon's peace initiatives were met with open arms by the Federation Council, but there were those on both sides who objected. A plot was forged between individuals associated with the Federation, the Romulan Star Empire, and even General Chang, Gorkon's own chief of staff. Gorkon traveled to rendezvous with the USS Enterprise-A aboard his flagship, Kronos One. He and a team of officers from Kronos One attended a formal dinner aboard the Enterprise with Captain Kirk and his crew. While there, Gorkon made a toast to the future – which he termed "the undiscovered country" – and expressed his hope that there would be peace between the Empire and the Federation.

Gorkon was back aboard Kronos One when, later that evening, the vessel was disabled by two photon torpedoes. They were fired by an experimental Bird-of-Prey which was under the command of General Chang and had the unique ability to fire while cloaked. As Kronos One drifted out-of-control, two mysterious assassins from the Enterprise beamed aboard, their faces hidden by helmets they wore. The fact that Kronos One was crippled by a lack of artificial gravity made it easy for the intruders, equipped with gravity boots, to systematically kill Klingons en route to the Chancellor. Indeed, they were able to easily injure a floating and defenseless Gorkon with a phaser shot to the chest, mortally wounding him. 
After Kronos One had restored power, Captain Kirk and Doctor Leonard McCoy beamed aboard to provide medical assistance. McCoy attempted to resuscitate Gorkon and was able to briefly bring him back to consciousness. With his dying breath, Gorkon motioned for Kirk to approach him, pleading, "Don't let it end this way, Captain." (Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country)
Kirk and McCoy were arrested for Gorkon's death and returned to Qo'noS. (Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country; VOY: "Flashback")
In the wake of his death, Gorkon's daughter, Azetbur, was elevated to the position of Chancellor. She continued to champion her father's ideals of peace, even in the face of resistance from her own advisors. The conspiracy was eventually uncovered by the crew of the Enterprise, enabling the continuation of the peace talks.
During his lifetime, Gorkon owned a bone cane and the Klingon Chain of Office. The latter item was inherited by Azetbur when she succeeded him as Chancellor. (Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country)
Gorkon's legacy would later be honored by the Federation through the naming of the starship USS Gorkon. (TNG: "Descent") and the Type 14 shuttlecraft Gorkon. (PIC: "Imposters")