Kahless the Unforgettable (Klingonese: qeylIS) was a legendary mytho-historical Klingon figure. He was the first Warrior King and Emperor of the Klingon Empire, known as the "greatest warrior of them all".
Kahless was the last Klingon to unite all tribes until the Federation-Klingon War of 2256, which was started with that purpose by a Klingon called T'Kuvma, who was concerned that his race had begun to "forget the Unforgettable". (DIS: "The Vulcan Hello")
Time crystals were a symbol of Kahless. (DIS: "Through the Valley of Shadows") Kahless' battle cry, "Today is a good day to die", continued to be a popular Klingon utterance into the 24th century, including in the simpler form "It is a good day to die." (VOY: "Dragon's Teeth"; DS9: "Blood Oath", "The Way of the Warrior")


== History ==
Sometime in the 9th century, Kahless united the Great Houses defeated his enemies, including Molor and the Fek'Ihri, on the field of battle and founded the mighty Klingon Empire, uniting the Klingon people and giving them the laws of honor. Kahless conquered Qo'noS from Molor which would become the Klingon homeworld. Upon his death, Kahless promised he would return one day and lead the Empire again. After his death, it was said that Kahless awaited all Klingons in Sto-vo-kor: the life which lies beyond this life. His teachings of honor and tradition formed the basis of modern Klingon philosophy and culture. As of 2374, Kahless was still revered as a near-divine figure by the Klingons. (VOY: "Day of Honor"; SA: "Vox In Excelso")
Although Kahless was not high-born, those who descended from him and his wife, the Lady Lukara, were said to reside within the Klingon Imperial Court. Those members of the Court, including Dahar master Kor, were considered "of the blood," and were regarded throughout the Empire to have been born to rule by the divine will of Kahless. (DS9: "Tacking Into the Wind", "Once More Unto the Breach")
In 2256, the zealot T'Kuvma proclaimed that the Great Houses of the Klingon Empire would "stand as one under Kahless, reborn in me, T'Kuvma." (DIS: "Battle at the Binary Stars")

In 2269, an image of Kahless was created by the Excalbians in a plot devised to better understand the concepts of "good" and "evil". The image was considerably flawed from the original Kahless, with such notable discrepancies as being infected with the Klingon augment virus and wearing a 23rd century Imperial Klingon Fleet uniform. The Excalbian version of Kahless appeared and acted quite differently from the original, since the image had been created from reading the minds of Humans who, at that point in Starfleet history, saw Kahless as a ruthless tyrant, and had had far more contact with Augment Klingons (or their descendants) than with standard Klingons. The Excalbian version of Kahless also had a talent for mimicking voices. (TOS: "The Savage Curtain")


== Legacy ==
The stories of Kahless were the stories of the Klingon people. Passed down from generation to generation, these stories reminded the Klingons about who they were and where they had come from. Klingons studied these stories for all of their lives; Worf said he found new truths in them on each reading. (TNG: "Birthright, Part II") Many of these stories were held within the sacred texts, a few exclusively. Nevertheless, they remained an integral part of Klingon lore.
The following stories are portions and excerpts of song and lore surrounding the life of Kahless:

Long ago, a storm was heading for the city of Quin'lat. Everyone took protection within the walls except one man who remained outside. Kahless went to him and asked what he was doing. "I am not afraid," the man said. "I will not hide my face behind stone and mortar. I will stand before the wind and make it respect me." Kahless honored his choice and went back inside. The next day, the storm came, and the man was killed. Kahless replied, "The wind does not respect a fool". (TNG: "Rightful Heir")

…Kahless was determined to teach his brother a lesson for having told a lie, because it made him look like a coward, but Morath refused to fight his brother, and instead ran away. Kahless pursued him across valleys and over mountains, all the way to the edge of the sea. And there on the shore, they fought for twelve days and twelve nights because Morath had broken his word and brought shame and dishonor to his family. (TNG: "New Ground", "Firstborn")

…Kahless held his father's lifeless body in his arms. He could not believe what his brother had done. Then, his brother threw their father's sword into the sea, saying that, if he could not possess it, neither would Kahless. That was the last time the brothers would speak. Kahless looked into the ocean and wept, for the sword was all he had left of his father and the sea filled with his tears and flooded beyond the shore. (TNG: "Birthright, Part II")
Kahless single-handedly fought off an entire army at Three Turn Bridge. (DS9: "Let He Who Is Without Sin...")
…The tyrant Molor was so strong that no one could stand against him. Kahless would rather die than live under Molor's tyranny… (TNG: "Firstborn")
Kahless went into the mountains, all the way to the Kri'stak Volcano. He cut off a lock of his hair and thrust it into the river of molten rock, which poured from the summit. The hair began to burn, but then he plunged it into the Lake of Lusor and twisted it into a sword. (TNG: "Rightful Heir")
From the "drinking song":

…and sticky-continuous and surrounded-continuous (by) blood, and the River Skral ran crimson red. On the day above all days. When Kahless slew evil Molor dead…! And after he used it to kill the tyrant Molor he gave it a name: bat'leth, "the sword of honor". (TNG: "Rightful Heir"; DS9: "The Way of the Warrior")

The story of the sword was known only by the Klingon High Clerics, because it was never written down in the sacred texts. This was so that, if Kahless was ever to return, they could be sure it was him. (TNG: "Rightful Heir") When the Shroud of the Sword of Kahless was discovered, it was determined that the Sword of Kahless dated back at least 1,400 years. (DS9: "The Sword of Kahless")

With the Sword, Kahless slew Molor, conquered the Fek'Ihri, and forged the first Empire. Kahless also used the Sword to skin the Serpent of Xol, to harvest his father's field, and to carve a statue for his beloved Lukara. (DS9: "The Sword of Kahless")
Molor's defeat was celebrated annually with the observance of the Kot'baval Festival. (TNG: "Firstborn")

A thousand years ago, at the dawn of the Empire, five hundred warriors stormed the Great Hall at Qam-Chee. The city garrison fled before them. Only the Emperor Kahless and the Lady Lukara stood their ground. It was here that they began the greatest romance in Klingon history. (DS9: "Looking for par'Mach in All the Wrong Places")
Kahless and Lukara were nearly killed, moments after they were married, by Molor's troops. (DS9: "You Are Cordially Invited")
The wielding of Ma'Stakas, used to re-enact Kahless' and Lukara's battle at Qam-Chee, at the conclusion of a Klingon wedding was a continued tradition in Klingon culture.

Another story that mentions Kahless entering the afterlife said that he was there to rescue his brother from the Barge of the Dead and deliver him to Sto-Vo-Kor. According to the Eleventh Tome of Klavek, Kahless returned from the dead still bearing a wound from the afterlife. (VOY: "Barge of the Dead")
The Story of the Promise was Kahless' swan song, "When Kahless united the people and gave them the laws of honor, he saw that his work was done. So one night he gathered his belongings and went to the edge of the city to say goodbye. The people wept, as they did not want him to go. And Kahless said, "You are Klingons. You need no one but yourselves. I will go now, to Sto-Vo-Kor. But I promise one day I will return." Then Kahless pointed to a star in the sky and said, "Look for me there, on that point of light." 

The story of "The Promise" indicated that Kahless was to reappear in the lava caves on the planet of Boreth. The Followers of Kahless, or Guardians, waited there for his return. To Klingons, there was no more sacred place. For over 1,500 years, Klingons came to Boreth to ask questions. According to the clerics, the only way a Klingon warrior could find the answers they sought was to "Open your heart to Kahless, ask him your questions, let him speak to you with your mind unclouded by doubt or hesitation. Only then can you find what you are looking for." (TNG: "Rightful Heir")
After witnessing Worf's prowess in battle against the Jem'Hadar, General Martok praised his fellow Klingon, noting that Worf "truly [had] the spirit of Kahless within [him]". (DS9: "By Inferno's Light")
Caleb Mir told Jay-Den Kraag that he had heard the story of how Kahless had conquered Qo'noS, the Klingon homeworld, from Molor and how "they ate entrails stew to taste their victory, and how Kahless' warriors laid their weapons at his feet to honor him." The Suvwl' tlhlq continues to commemorate the event. Jay-Den revealed that his parents had sung Jay-Den and his brother Thar to sleep with that myth and it gave them comfort in the refugee camps. After finally understanding the myth, Jay-Den suggested to Starfleet that, instead of giving Faan Alpha to Klingons as their homeworld (which they refused as charity), "fight" the Klingons and allow the Klingons "conquer" the planet, as Kahless had done with Qo'noS. (SA: "Vox In Excelso")


=== Artifacts ===
Beacon of Kahless
Emperor's Crown
Fornication Helmet
Grail of Kahless
Knife of Kirom
Shroud of Kahless
Sword of Kahless
Shroud of the Sword


=== See also ===
Order of Kahless
Spirit of Kahless
Star of Kahless


=== Quotations ===
"Destroying an empire to win a war is no victory. And ending a battle to save an empire is no defeat." (DS9: "The Way of the Warrior")
"There is no victory without combat." (ENT: "Divergence")
"Great men do not seek power; they have power thrust upon them." (DS9: "Tacking Into the Wind")
"Today is a good day to die." (VOY: "Dragon's Teeth")


=== The Rightful Heir ===

See: Kahless (clone)