K'Ehleyr, the daughter of a Human mother and a Klingon father, was an ambassador and special emissary of the Federation in the 2360s.


== Biography ==
K'Ehleyr described herself as being "trapped between two cultures" with bi-racial parents. Having the humor of her mother and the temper from her father, she preferred her Human side and exercised tight control of her Klingon tendencies. Her Klingon side nevertheless gave her strength, even if terrifying. (TNG: "The Emissary")
Though K'Ehleyr knew much about Klingon culture and fighting techniques, she never showed much respect for Klingon values, which was sometimes a cause of great fury for Worf. Consequently, she never taught Alexander about the Klingon way of living before her death. (TNG: "Firstborn"; DS9: "Sons and Daughters")
In 2359, she had a relationship with then Lieutenant Worf, but neither felt ready to engage in a deep relationship, so they separated. 

In 2365, she traveled from Starbase 153 to the USS Enterprise-D on an urgent mission to intercept the Klingon sleeper ship IKS T'Ong, which was about to become active. The mission was considered so urgent and time-sensitive that K'Ehleyr agreed to be transported to the rendezvous with the capital ship in a Class 8 probe, capable of speeds of Warp 9, modified for space travel purposes. The Klingon vessel would have been unaware of the Federation-Klingon alliance, therefore posing a threat to Federation establishments in the Boradis system. While searching for the T'Ong, she renewed her relationship with Worf, but refused to marry him when he asked her. Due to this short renewal, however, she gave birth to a son a year later. On the mission, she tried to persuade Captain Picard to destroy the Klingon ship as soon as possible, but thanks to an idea of Worf's, this could be prevented: to convince the T'Ong's crew of the Alliance, Worf posed as the captain of the Enterprise, with K'Ehleyr as his first officer. After the T'Ong's crew had agreed to lay down their weapons, K'Ehleyr beamed aboard the T'Ong to prepare the crew for the 24th century while waiting for the IKS P'Rang. Before transporting over, Worf told her that he would never be complete without her. (TNG: "The Emissary")

In 2367, she accompanied Klingon chancellor K'mpec, who had chosen Picard as Arbiter of Succession, to a meeting with the Enterprise. When she came aboard, Worf learned of his son Alexander for the first time. K'Ehleyr expressed her desire to become Worf's mate at this time, but he refused, saying that he did not desire to share his discommendation with her and Alexander. After K'mpec's death, she assisted Picard in the Rite of Succession, briefing him about Klingon rituals and tradition. As she therefore had much influence on the Rite, Gowron tried to bribe her with the command over a Klingon ship or a seat in the Klingon High Council, but she refused. Later, she discovered evidence that proved Duras was involved in the conspiracy that led to Worf's discommendation; on learning of her search through attempts to access Klingon High Council records he sealed, Duras attacked K'Ehleyr in her quarters and killed her. Worf transported to Duras' ship shortly later and killed him in vengeance, defending his right to do so as the mate of K'Ehleyr. Afterwards, Worf claimed Alexander as his son and placed him in his adoptive parents' care on Earth. (TNG: "Reunion")
Alexander kept a picture of his mother next to his bed aboard the Enterprise. (TNG: "Firstborn")
In 2374, Quark joked that Alexander must have gotten his looks from his mother's side of the family. (DS9: "You Are Cordially Invited")