Nustopher "Nus" Braka was a Klingon-Tellarite hybrid who operated as a Venari Ral pirate during the late 32nd century. He referred to himself as a "Klingarite".


== Early life ==
Like many other people born after the Burn, Braka didn't know where he was born, but his family had nothing, so they moved around a lot, even when they were sick and tired. Braka lived on a small mining colony that mined strontium, a cheap but lethal fuel source as it exploded upon hitting anything volatile. There were a steady stream of Federation supply ships that flew over the colony which Braka enjoyed watching as a kid. However, none of the ships ever stopped at the colony despite attempts to signal them, likely because they were going to places much worse off that needed the supplies.
In desperation, Braka's father rigged up a crude weapon fueled by strontium to attempt to bring down one of the supply ships. However, he missed and the strontium ignited the buildup of toxic oxides in the colony's atmosphere. The colony was destroyed, killing Braka's family and leaving him one of only eight survivors. Braka blamed the United Federation of Planets for the loss of his family, believing that they had "rained red hellfire" down on the colony in retaliation for his father's attempt to shoot down a supply ship. However, Federation weaponry and fire for at least the last few hundred years had always been blue or green, not red, while strontium burned red like a match in a tinderbox. Braka was never able to see the truth and grew up seeking vengeance on the Federation. (SA: "Rubincon")


== Venari Ral ==
In 3178, Braka recruited Anisha Mir as an accomplice to steal food rations from a Federation supply ship, exploiting her desperation to feed her young son Caleb. Braka murdered the Starfleet pilot Lieutenant Akamu Lee in the course of the theft, elevating the crime to a felony, although Braka claimed self-defense because Akamu pulled his weapon on them. He and the Mirs were apprehended afterward and brought to Pikaru, where Captain Nahla Ake sentenced Braka to life imprisonment at a Federation penal colony. Braka remained defiant throughout, proclaiming his innocence and screaming at Caleb not to trust them. (SA: "Kids These Days", "Rubincon")
In 3191, Braka broke out of prison and contacted Mir, offering to help her escape. Desperate to get out and find her son, Mir accepted. Having no intention of joining Braka and the Venari Ral, Mir faked her death on Goja V in order to escape from him. Braka was successfully fooled into believing that she had died. (SA: "Kids These Days", "300th Night", "Rubincon")
A year later, Braka detected Caleb's attempt to contact his mother from the USS Athena over an old Venari Ral frequency, and laid a trap by faking the presence of a spatial anomaly near the Badlands. When the Athena approached to investigate, he deployed a proprietary form of programmable matter onto its hull that disabled its primary systems. Now styling himself a "commandante", Braka led a boarding party to steal the Athena's warp drive, taking the opportunity also to taunt Ake.
To give Caleb and the other cadets an opening for their plan to restore the ship's systems, Ake activated the Ramcon Six Simulation Program, creating the appearance of an imminent warp core breach. Braka sent his followers back to his ship but, suspecting a lie, remained behind himself in engineering. He caught Caleb trying to activate the main deflector and revealed that Anisha had been on Goja V. Despite overpowering Caleb, Braka was unable to stop him from neutralizing the programmable matter. The Athena proceeded to destroy Braka's ship, while Braka fled in an Athena escape pod. (SA: "Kids These Days")
In 3196, Braka established a field of Omega-47 mines around the entire Federation, captured Ake and Anisha Mir and held a trial for the Federation as Braka planned to establish a cartel of non-member worlds under his leadership. However, Braka's plan was thwarted when SAM was able to stabilize and deactivate the mines while Ake and Caleb exposed the fact that Braka's homeworld -- supposedly destroyed by the Federation -- had actually been destroyed by his own father, discrediting Braka in the eyes of his associates. Admiral Charles Vance arrived with the entire Federation fleet to force the Venari Ral to surrender and arrest Braka. Before Braka was taken away, Caleb returned his mocking words from years earlier and both Anisha and Ake punched Braka in the face, knocking out one of his teeth. (SA: "300th Night", "Rubincon")