Enterprise takes on board Rajiin: a beautiful, enigmatic passenger with ulterior motives.


== Summary ==


=== Teaser ===
The Xindi Council continues to monitor Enterprise's advance through the Delphic Expanse and debates whether to develop a bio-weapon to be used instead of Degra's weapon. Since Degra has experienced setbacks for his weapon, Dolim wants to revisit the bio-weapon, even though it has been dismissed before (at least by the Aquatics, Primates, and Arboreals). The majority decides to give Degra more time, though Kiaphet Amman'sor warns that, if progress isn't made soon, they'll have to consider all options.


=== Act One ===
Meanwhile, Enterprise is headed to the Xanthan planet where a chemist is said to be able to synthesize liquid trellium-D which will insulate the the ship hull against spatial anomalies within the Delphic Expanse. On the way, Trip Tucker and T'Pol are having another session to help him realign his neural pressure. Tucker is dedicated to the technique, as it's helping him, however he pauses during tonight's session to suggest stopping them altogether, due to the perceptions of the crew seeing him visit T'Pol each night. T'Pol dismisses his concern and, since it's not bothering her, they continue the exercises. Elsewhere, Captain Jonathan Archer has trouble sleeping through both the continued nightmares and itching caused by his exposure to an alien mutagenic virus earlier and his recovery. Phlox gives him some ointment, and adds the healing process will not happen overnight.
The Enterprise arrives on the Xanthan planet and an away team of Archer, Tucker and Malcolm Reed visit the floating bazaar where the chemist's shop is located. It's a very busy marketplace, but they eventually find it. Archer enters the barge and announces he has an appointment when B'Rat says he is closed. Archer then reminds B'Rat that they met at the deuterium station at Norellus. B'Rat tells them to come back later, but Archer presses him, stating that he claimed he could sell them formula to synthesize trellium-D. B'Rat remembers him and asks about his well-being, but Archer seems impatient with the conversation because he is pressed for time. B'Rat comments how rare trellium-D is when Tucker realizes he is only trying to drive the price of the formula up. B'Rat asks about their interest in the Xindi, and Archer will only say they are on a diplomatic mission. B'Rat mentions that the Xindi were there the week before. Reed asks B'Rat where they could find them now. B'Rat says he would direct them for a small fee. Archer then explains that Tucker has a list of items they would be willing to barter with, and that Tucker can work out the trade details for the information with B'Rat.
While Tucker and the chemist work out what to trade, Archer and Reed visit the merchant, Zjod, who met the Xindi earlier. The man, who is apparently in the slave trade, with several women on a platform, admits they came and left two days prior. He keeps turning the conversation to his women, but Archer isn't interested. One woman does catch his attention, but they leave; thanking the man for his time.

As they leave to go back to the ship for the chemist's payment, Archer and Reed turn around to see the same slave woman running toward them, pleading for them to take her with them. They then protect her from the pursuing slave merchant and take her with them to the ship. In sickbay, Phlox looks her over and sees she is healthy, though he doesn't know her species. She says her name is Rajiin and thanks Archer for helping her. Archer makes it clear he doesn't accept slavery, and he will try to find her homeworld. She thanks him again.


=== Act Two ===
The liquid trellium formula is purchased from B'Rat in exchange for a variety of "exotic" spices, including pepper, paprika, mustard seed, and one Tucker is partial to, cayenne pepper. Tucker and Reed are then warned by B'Rat to follow the protocols precisely, as liquid trellium-D is highly unstable.
Meanwhile, Archer speaks with Rajiin over a meal. He hopes she is comfortable, and says she can look around. Rajiin is curious about the crew and their mission. Archer mentions the Xindi, but she only knows little about them. The ones she saw were reptilian Xindi. Tucker calls Archer away to brief him on their planning to synthesize the trellium. T'Pol recommends synthesizing the compounds on E deck, within the emergency bulkheads.
Later that evening, Rajiin comes to Archer's quarters to talk to Archer and repay him for his kindness. Archer informs her they have located her home world of Oran'taku, only two days away. She states she doesn't remember the place, but wants to thank him, and kisses him. Despite him saying it isn't necessary, the kiss appears to affect Archer, and Rajiin proceeds to scan him with her hands, allowing a view of his insides. Then, suddenly, Archer snaps out of it and sees her standing away from him. She asks him if he's all right and he says yes. Then then bids him goodnight, leaving him to recover from whatever happened.
T'Pol and Tucker's first attempt at synthesizing trellium-D is a delicate balance between input delta radiation and the pressure of the system. Unfortunately, no matter how Tucker changes the radiation, the pressure keeps rising and T'Pol orders them out of the room. They return to see the aftermath of a major explosion in their workspace. T'Pol suggests they have another neuro-pressure session before attempting the synthesis again.
Meanwhile, Rajiin explores Enterprise, and comes across the transporter room, where she encounters Hoshi Sato. Rajiin says she's looking for the mess hall, which Sato states she's heading for, noticeably entranced by Rajiin. As they walk, Rajiin asks what Hoshi does, to which she replies "communications officer". A look passes between the two, and Hoshi seductively states that she'd love to hear Rajiin's language.
Later, T'Pol, preparing to meditate, is startled to find Rajiin entering her quarters.


=== Act Three ===

Rajiin, noticeably bolder than earlier, claims that the door was unlocked and wanted to talk to T'Pol. She starts to seduce T'Pol physically and mentally, and T'Pol asks her to leave. Rajiin gets more control over T'Pol and starts scanning through her head and spine, but the Vulcan shows some resistance. Tucker comes to the door, but T'Pol cannot answer and Rajiin starts to hurry with what she's doing. T'Pol's able to push Rajiin away, but she comes back and knocks out T'Pol, and, when Tucker finally opens the door himself, she attacks him as well when he checks T'Pol and runs. However, Tucker remains conscious and alerts security.
Rajiin then continues her plan, informing someone off the ship of her plan to use the transporter. Reed and his team pursue Rajiin, but she's able to seduce one of them, getting his phase-pistol and make it to engineering. Through her handling of the pistol and ability to evade the crew, she reveals she is much more than a slave girl. She then heads to the transporter room and is caught by Archer and another security team, informed that her communications have been jammed. He has Ensign Walsh take her to the brig.
Archer checks on T'Pol in sickbay. Phlox doesn't exactly know what happened, but attributes her survival to Vulcan neurophysiology. Unfortunately, it'll be a few hours before Archer can talk to her. He then goes to the brig, demanding Rajiin to know what she was doing. She replies that her contacts will kill her if she tells him, but he replies he may do the same. She only says that she finds them admirable and doesn't want to see them harmed, recommending they let her go. Then, he gets word that two ships are approaching – Xindi-Reptilian.


=== Act Four ===
The two ships immediately attack Enterprise, knocking it out of warp. In the brig, Archer tries again to ask her, but is soon informed that one of the ships is attempting to board. He starts to leave to organize the crew, but then Rajiin gives in, telling him that the Xindi want medical information on Humans for a bio-weapon they're building. Archer orders the brig secured and protected.

The MACOs and crew engage three boarding parties made up of Xindi-Reptilians and Xindi-Insectoids. The Enterprise crew's weapons are unfortunately not very effective against them, and they fall back. The team protecting the brig is incapacitated by the reptilians by a strange organic grenade. The reptilians break open the brig and take Rajiin away with them. Archer chases the retreating aliens only to be tackled by one sacrificing himself to be left behind. The alien is incapacitated as Archer sees Rajiin behind the closing door of the airlock.
The Enterprise pursues the ships, but they soon escape through a subspace vortex which loses them. The alien who sacrificed himself is dead, apparently using a genetically enhanced suicide gland. Archer orders a complete autopsy and a thorough analysis of the Xindi rifle from Reed. He orders T'Pol to analyze the vortex.

The Reptilians announce their completed mission at the next Xindi Council, infuriating the majority as it was unauthorized and leaves them vulnerable through exposure of their plans to the Humans. They bring out Rajiin and she reluctantly uploads the data necessary to create the bio-weapon. She also tries to state that there is more to Humans than they realize, but Commander Dolim orders her away.


== Memorable quotes ==
"You were transformed into a different species. Don't expect to recover overnight."

- Phlox, when Archer tells him about his dreams of Urquat

"I'm called Rajiin. Very grateful for what you've done, captain. I'll serve you well, I promise."

- Rajiin believing she is now Archer's property

"On our planet... wars were fought over these."

- Tucker, showcasing the various spices from Earth

"Some of our calculations may have been slightly off."

- T'Pol, to Tucker after their failed attempt to synthesize trellium-D

"Leaving us so soon?"

- Archer, to Rajiin, when she tries fleeing by using the transporter

"Have Phlox take a look at your head."

- Archer, to Tucker in sickbay


== Background information ==
This episode was originally titled "Enemy Advances". [1]
As evidenced by the final draft script of this installment, the neuro-pressure scene between T'Pol and Tucker, near the start of the episode, was an "added scene", written into the script at a late stage in the making of the episode.
A Benzite can be seen at the alien market.
Phlox mentions that Crewman Cutler broke her arm when an anomaly passed through the ship. This is the final reference to Cutler; the actress who played her in previous episodes, Kellie Waymire, died a month after this episode aired and the character was retired.
Several costumes and props from this episode were sold off on the It's A Wrap! sale and auction on eBay, including a slave price tag, [2](X) a bottle with a Triskelion emblem, [3](X) a dark bottle, [4](X) an alien advertising sign, [5](X) and a schematic lot for the Xanthan floating bazaar, drawn by Set Designer Ahna Packard. [6](X)


== Links and references ==


=== Starring ===
Scott Bakula as Jonathan Archer
John Billingsley as Phlox
Jolene Blalock as T'Pol
Dominic Keating as Malcolm Reed
Anthony Montgomery as Travis Mayweather
Linda Park as Hoshi Sato
Connor Trinneer as Charles "Trip" Tucker III


=== Guest Stars ===
Nikita Ager as Rajiin
Tucker Smallwood as Xindi-Primate Councilor
Randy Oglesby as Degra
Rick Worthy as Jannar
Scott MacDonald as Dolim
Steve Larson as Zjod


=== Co-Stars ===
Dell Yount as B'Rat
BK Kennelly as Alien Merchant
Ken Lally as Security Guard


=== Uncredited Co-Stars ===
Aldric Horton as Xindi-Arboreal councilor
Joey Anaya as Xindi-Reptilian soldier
Staci Anderson as Nuvian slave girl
Adam Anello as Xanthan bazaar alien
Brian Avery as operations crewman
Jef Ayres as Haynem
Breezy as Porthos
Jacob Chambers as Xindi-Reptilian soldier
Jason Collins as R. Ryan
Mark Correy as
Alex
Xanthan bazaar alien
Jared Patrick Cox as Xanthan bazaar alien
Daphney Dameraux as operations ensign
Elizabeth DeCicco as slave girl
Kevin Derr as G. Austin
Roxanne Doman as slave girl
Mark Donaldson as operations crewman
Evan English as Tanner
Ian Eyre as Xindi-Reptilian soldier
Nikki Flux as Xanthan bazaar alien
Duncan K. Fraser as Walsh
Jamie Freeman as slave girl
Hilde Garcia as Xanthan bazaar alien
Robert Garcon as operations crewman
Peter Godoy as operations crewman
Glen Hambly as operations ensign
Roy Joaquin as
Operations crewman
Xanthan bazaar alien
Brandon Johnson as Xindi-Reptilian soldier
John Jurgens as
Benzite trader
Xindi-Reptilian soldier
Marlene Mogavero as operations crewman
Dorenda Moore as S. Money
Tom Morga as Xindi-Reptilian soldier
Robin Morselli as Xanthan bazaar alien
Lin Oeding as operations crewman
Louis Ortiz as Xanthan bazaar alien
Bobby Pappas as operations crewman
Julie Sands as Xanthan bazaar alien
Paul Sklar as R. Richards
Justin Sundquist as MACO B. Scott
Chris Torres as B. Moreno
Unknown performers as
Alien slave girl
Borothan
Dee'Ahn's species member
Female bridge crewman (voice)
Kolaran on Xanthan bazaar
Operations crewman 2nd class
Tash's species female
Twenty-five Xanthan bazaar aliens
Xindi-Reptilian council guard
Xindi-Reptilian councilor


=== Stunt Doubles ===
Charlie Brewer as stunt double for Steve Larson
Stacey Carino as stunt double for Nikita Ager
Shawn Crowder as stunt double for Connor Trinneer
Vince Deadrick, Jr. as stunt double for Scott Bakula
Boni Yanagisawa as stunt double for Jolene Blalock


=== CGI Characters ===
Kiaphet Amman'sor
Xindi-Aquatic councilor
Xindi-Insectoid aide (Stand-in: Evan English)
Xindi-Insectoid councilor (Stand-in: Tarik Ergin)
Xindi-Insectoid soldier (Stand-in: Evan English)


=== Stand-ins ===
David Keith Anderson – stand-in for Anthony Montgomery and utility stand-in
Jef Ayres – stand-in for Connor Trinneer and Jason Collins
Evan English – stand-in for Dominic Keating and Justin Sundquist
Tarik Ergin – Utility Xindi-Reptilian stand-in
Shannon Hazlett – stand-in for Nikita Ager
Louis Ortiz – Utility Xindi-Reptilian stand-in
J.R. Quinonez – stand-in for John Billingsley and Dell Yount and utility stand-in
Richard Sarstedt – stand-in for Scott Bakula
Pablo Soriano – utility stand-in
Jessica Vash – stand-in for Jolene Blalock and Dorenda Moore
Susan Yee – stand-in for Linda Park


=== References ===
arm; Barge 12; barter; black pepper; biogenic weapon; biometric hologram; biometric scan; boarding party; cayenne; chemical formula; chemist; Cutler; delta radiation; Denobula; deuterium; dose; Earth; emergency bulkhead; exobiology lab; "field day"; gesture; hyperspanner; inner hull; injector assembly; jaw; Khavorta posture; liquid state; Loque'eque; mustard seed; neocortex; neurophysiology; neuro-pressure; neuro-scan; neurotoxin; newcomer; Norellus; Nuvian; ointment; Oran'taku; Oran'taku; paprika; phenomenon; Porthos; quarters; referral; retina; sculpture; security detail; senior officer; serpent women; slavery; spatial anomaly; spinal cord; stun grenade; subspace vortex; suicide; surah'tahn; theta radiation; thumbprint; transporter device; trellium; U'tani; unit; Urquat; V'radian; Vulcan; wildlife; Xanthan floating bazaar; Xanthan planet; Xanthan marmot; xenobiology; Xindi bio-weapon; Xindi database; Xindi-Arboreal; Xindi-Aquatic; Xindi-Insectoid; Xindi-Primate; Xindi-Reptilian; Xindi-Reptilian warship; Xindi technology


==== Star chart references ====
1 Centauri; 10 Canum Venaticorum; 11 Leonis Minoris; 13 Ceti; 15 Sagittae; 17 Cygni; 26 Draconis; 31 Aquilae; 36 Ophiuchi; 36 Ursae Majoris; 39 Leonis; 39 Serpentis; 40 Eridani A; 47 Ursae Majoris; 51 Pegasi; 53 Aquarii; 59 Virginis; 61 Cygni; 61 Ursae Majoris; 61 Virginis; 70 Ophiuchi; 70 Virginis; 82 Eridani; 83 Leonis; 94 Aquarii; 96 Aquarii; 99 Herculis; Aldhibain (Eta Draconis); Aldus Prime; Algorab (Delta Corvi); Alioth (Epsilon Ursae Majoris); Alkaid (Eta Ursae Majoris); Alpha Caeli; Alpha Centauri; Alpha Chamaeleontis; Alpha Circini; Alpha Fornacis; Alpha Hydri; Alpha Mensae; Alshain (Beta Aquilae); Altair (Alpha Aquilae); Andoria; Ankaa (Alpha Phoenicis); Arcturus (Alpha Boötis); Babel; Barnard's Star; Beta Caeli; Beta Comae Berenices; Beta Geminorum; Beta Hydri; Beta Pictoris; Capella (Alpha Aurigae); Caph (Beta Cassiopeiae); Chara (Beta Canum Venaticorum); Chi Ceti A; Chi Draconis; Chi1 Orionis; Chi Eridani; Chi Herculis; Chi Leonis; Cor Caroli (Alpha Canum Venticorum); Delta Aquilae; Delta Equulei; Delta Leonis; Delta Pavonis; Delta Phoenicis; Delta Sculptoris; Delta Trianguli; Diadem (Alpha Comae Berenices); Diphda (Deneb Kaitos, 16 Ceti); Earth (Terra); Epsilon Eridani; Epsilon Fornacis; Epsilon Indi; Epsilon Phoenicis; Epsilon Reticuli; Epsilon Sculptoris; Eta Cassiopeiae; Eta Corvi; Eta Crucis; Fomalhaut (Alpha Piscis Australis); Gamma Doradus; Gamma Equulei; Gamma Leporis; Gamma Pavonis; Gamma Serpentis; Gamma Tucanae; Gemma (Alpha Coronae Borealis); Groombridge 34; Heze (Zeta Virginis); Iota Boötis; Iota Carinae; Iota Centauri; Iota Eridani; Iota Horologii; Iota Leonis; Iota Persei; Iota Piscium; Kappa Fornacis; Kappa Reticuli; Kappa Tucanae; Lalande 25372; Lambda Boötis; Lambda Serpentis; Luyten's Star; Megrez (Delta Ursae Majoris); Merak (Beta Ursae Majoris); Mizar (Zeta Ursae Majoris); Mothallah (Alpha Trianguli, Caput); Mu Cassiopeiae; Mu Herculis; Omega Draconis; Omega Piscium; P'Jem; p Eridani; Phecda (Gamma Ursae Majoris); Pi¹ Ursae Majoris; Pi³ Orionis; Pi Mensae; Pi Piscis Australis; Pollux; Porrima (Gamma Virginis); Procyon; Proxima; Psi Draconis; Psi Serpentis; Psi Velorum; Rasalhague (Alpha Ophiuchi); Regulus (Alpha Leonis); Rho Boötis; Rho Coronae Borealis; Rho Puppis; Rho Virginis; Rigel; Ross 614; Seginus (Gamma Boötis); Sigma Boötis; Sigma Ceti; Sigma Coronae Borealis; Sigma Draconis; Sigma Pegasi; Sirius (Alpha Canis Majoris); Sol system; Tau Boötis; Tau¹ Eridani; Tau Ceti; Tau Hydrae; Tau Piscis Australis; Tellar; Terra Nova; Theta Ceti; Theta Cygni; Theta Draconis; Theta Sculptoris; Theta Ursae Majoris; Upsilon Andromedae; Upsilon Aquarii; van Maanen's Star; Vega (Alpha Lyrae); Vendor; Vindemiatrix (Epsilon Virginis);  Vulcan; Wolf 359; Wolf 424; Xi Pegasi; Xi Virginis; Zavijava (Beta Virginis); Zeta Fornacis; Zeta Herculis; Zeta Trianguli Australis; Zeta² Reticuli


=== External links ===
"Rajiin" at Memory Beta, the wiki for licensed Star Trek works
"Rajiin" at Wikipedia
"Rajiin" at the Internet Movie Database