892-IV was the inhabited fourth planet of the 892 system. This planet was located in a sector of the Beta Quadrant that had not been surveyed by the Federation until the early 2260s. Classified as M-class, the planet was orbited by two moons and was the homeworld of the 892-IV natives, a pre-warp humanoid species.
Commander Spock, the science officer of the USS Enterprise, when scanning the planet, noted that 892-IV had a striking resemblance to Earth. However, as much as there were similarities, there were differences. The proportion of land to water, density (5.5 g/cm3), and atmosphere (78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen) were exactly like those on Earth. However, unlike Earth, the diameter at the equator (7,917 miles) and layout of the land masses were different. (TOS: "Bread and Circuses")


== History ==
This planet was cited as evidence of Hodgkin's Law of Parallel Planetary Development. The English language had evolved, and a parallel of the Roman Empire existed here.

By the mid-23rd century, the planet had reached the development of Earth's 20th century. Technology included radio communications, road system and powered transportation (such as the Jupiter 8), but no atomic power. Gladiatorial arena games became televised. With each century, even slaves received rights to medicine and government payments in their old age; the Empire eventually managed to stop rebellions and even wars for four hundred years, achieving stability.
The Romans believed in a pantheon of gods, but a nascent movement known as Children of the Son, a parallel to Christianity on Earth, started to be embraced by gladiators, slaves, and even senators, disrupting the stability of the conservative Empire.
In 2262, the Federation class 4 stardrive survey vessel SS Beagle was badly damaged by a meteor in the system and a landing party beamed down to obtain iridium ore for repairs. The party was met by the locals, led by Proconsul Claudius Marcus who considered it potentially ruinous to his highly conservative society if word of its existence should be carried elsewhere; the crewmembers were regarded as captured barbarians and given a choice: Living quietly in the roman society while keeping their extraterrestrial background a secret or forced to fight as gladiators. The Beagle's captain R.M. Merik became First Citizen.
Captain James T. Kirk and the crew of the Enterprise visited the planet 892-IV six years later, on stardate 4040.7, after investigating the debris of the Beagle. They were held captives both by fugitives and later the proconsul and Merik. The Enterprise managed to escape and speculated that the new religion might bring the transformation of the Empire, much like Christianity did to the Roman Empire. (TOS: "Bread and Circuses")


=== Geography ===
892-IV had several oceans and at least three continents. The land that the landing party from the Enterprise visited was politically subdivided into a number of provinces.

City Arena
City Prison
Massachusetts Institute of Technology