Altamid was an M-class planet in the Altamid system. This planet was found inside the Necro Cloud nebula and was located somewhere in the Alpha or Beta Quadrant. It was once inhabited by an advanced, spacefaring civilization, later called the Ancient Ones. Altamid was characterized by massive subterranean development with little-to-no lifeforms detectable from orbit. However, it had forests and other plant life.
In the 2260s of the alternate reality, information on this planet was located in the Federation database. According to the database, the planet was located in a non-Federation jurisdiction.


== History ==

In 2164, the Federation starship USS Franklin crash landed on Altamid. Only three crew members survived, including Captain Balthazar Edison and his officers Anderson Le and Jessica Wolff. Unable to contact Starfleet and seeing no sign of rescue, Edison and his crew came to embrace an anti-Federation ideology.

Discovering a cache of technology left behind by the planet's former inhabitants – including advanced mining technology, a drone workforce, thousands of ships and a device capable of extending life by draining energy from victims – the three survivors resolved to make Humanity strong again through war. They began to use the technology on the planet to raid unsuspecting ships and drain their crews, becoming Krall, Manas, and Kalara in the process and seeking out the Abronath, a lost weapon native to Altamid. (Star Trek Beyond)


=== Alternate reality ===

In 2263, Krall learned that the missing half of the Abronath had been discovered by the USS Enterprise and was currently being transported aboard that ship. He instructed Kalara to pose as an alien whose ship had crashed on Altamid, luring the Enterprise to the planet's system, where it was attacked and destroyed by Krall's swarm.

While the remains of the Enterprise crashed onto the surface of Altamid, many of the survivors were captured by Krall and imprisoned in his compound. Most of the Enterprise senior staff managed to elude capture and soon rescued their shipmates using the transporter aboard the long hidden USS Franklin. The Enterprise crew eventually escaped the planet aboard the hastily repaired Franklin, pursuing Krall to prevent him from releasing the Abronath on Starbase Yorktown and the Federation at large. (Star Trek Beyond)


== Planetary features ==

Altamid featured a diverse topology ranging from craggy canyons to lush forests. Extremely tall trees marked the landscape in one location. Another location was distinguished by golden yellow rocks, another – the area later held by Krall – by blue quarries.
The planet was also host to an array of insect life, including flying insects that reflected the swarm-like nature of Altamid's indigenous spacecraft. (Star Trek Beyond)