Archanis IV, or, more simply, as Archanis, was the inhabited fourth planet in the Archanis system. This planet was located in the Archanis sector, Beta Quadrant. (TOS: "Day of the Dove"; DS9: "Broken Link")
From the 23rd to the 25th centuries, Archanis IV was near the Federation-Klingon border. (TOS: "Day of the Dove"; DS9: "Broken Link")
In the late 2260s, an alleged Federation research outpost on this planet was attacked by unidentified raiders. A hundred civilians were killed in the raid. This was one of several incidents that had taken place since a truce was declared between the Federation and the Klingon Empire. Although there was no proof of Klingon involvement in these incidents, some in the Federation believed them responsible. The Klingons claimed that they had observed the treaty to the letter for three years and that they were not responsible for the raids. In 2268, while under the influence of the Beta XII-A entity, Pavel Chekov was made to believe he had once had a brother, Piotr Chekov, who had been killed by the Klingons at the research outpost on Archanis IV. In reality, he had no brother; the entity wished to foment hostility between the crew of the USS Enterprise and the Klingons. (TOS: "Day of the Dove")
Circa 2272, the Klingons relinquished their claim on the Archanis sector to the Federation. (DS9: "Broken Link")

Prior to the beginning of the Federation-Klingon War, Gowron sent a message to the Federation Council, telling them to abandon all starbases and military installations in the sector. During the war, the planet was raided by a Klingon force. As a condition of ending the war, Chancellor Gowron stated that the Federation must allow the Klingon Empire to annex Archanis and other worlds captured by Klingons. Captain Benjamin Sisko told the Klingon leader that he couldn't count on that condition being met. In 2399, as depicted on a star chart in Fleet Admiral Kirsten Clancy's office at Starfleet Headquarters, the Archanis system was in or near Klingon space. (DS9: "Broken Link", "Apocalypse Rising", "Nor the Battle to the Strong"; PIC: "Maps and Legends")
In the 32nd century, this planet was located in the Klingon Zone. (DIS: "Scavengers")
In the 32nd century, Archanis IV was a Federation member planet. It was listed with other members on a video wall in the USS Athena. (SA: "Kids These Days")