Archer IV was an inhabited earthlike planet, the fourth orbiting the primary 61 Ursae Majoris, and was itself circled by two moons. This planet was located in the Beta Quadrant and was approximately 31 light years from Sol.


== History ==
The first M-class world surveyed by the crew of the starship Enterprise NX-01, Archer IV was unpopulated when it was discovered in 2151. The planet was later named in honor of the ship's commanding officer, Starfleet Captain Jonathan Archer.  (ENT: "Strange New World", "In A Mirror, Darkly, Part II" production art)
Archer IV's atmosphere was composed of seventeen percent oxygen and eighty-one percent nitrogen, also including trace elements of nitrogen dioxide and chloromethane. Boasting a fertile landscape including vast grasslands and snow-topped mountains, Archer IV was inhabited by a wide array of plant and animal lifeforms, including nocturnal marsupials, scorpion-like arachnids, fireflies, and fish. The planet, however, supported no indigenous intelligent lifeforms.
The first Earth creature to set foot on the planet was Porthos, Captain Archer's dog, followed moments later by Archer himself.
Initial landing parties in 2151 experienced rapidly changing weather patterns and fast-moving storms. Such inclement weather spread toxic pollen, released by the diverse fauna and flora, causing in Human and Vulcan visitors paranoia and decreased cognitive function. With no refuge from the effects of the pollen, the planet was considered to be uninhabitable. (ENT: "Strange New World", "Home", "Two Days and Two Nights")
Shortly before Travis Mayweather visited the ECS Horizon in January 2153, Charles Tucker III handed him a PADD which included a picture of Mayweather standing in a green field on Archer IV. (ENT: "Horizon")

In 2154, Jonathan Archer pointed out Archer IV's parent star in the night sky over Earth, and recounted his crew's experience on the planet to Captain Erika Hernandez. (ENT: "Home")
Archer IV remained uninhabitable throughout the 22nd century. In the early 2200s, however, an antidote for the pollen was discovered. By 2268, more than seven hundred million people populated the planet. (ENT: "In A Mirror, Darkly, Part II" production art)
In 2366, Archer IV was the destination of the Federation starship USS Enterprise-D following an investigation of a nearby radiation anomaly. (TNG: "Yesterday's Enterprise")
Jack Crusher, under his alias "James Cole", was charged with possession of unregistered arms on Archer IV in the late 24th century. (PIC: "Disengage")
In an alternate timeline, Archer IV was the site of a battle in a Federation-Klingon War during the mid-2360s. At this engagement, the Enterprise-D emerged victorious against the Klingons. During a later confrontation with the Klingons, following the appearance of the Ambassador-class starship USS Enterprise-C from a temporal rift, a small Klingon task force arrived decloaked, prompting Commander William T. Riker to remark, "They shouldn't be so confident after the pasting we gave them on Archer IV." (TNG: "Yesterday's Enterprise")


== Stellar Cartography ==
In 2371, the location of Archer IV was labeled in a star chart Data and Picard studied in stellar cartography aboard the Enterprise-D. (Star Trek Generations, okudagram)