Argelius II, sometimes referred to simply as Argelius, was the inhabited second planet in the Argelius system. This Class M planet was located in the Argelius sector, Beta Quadrant, and was approximately 77 light years from Sol, This was the homeworld of the humanoid species known as the Argelians.
The lifestyle and clothing of the Argelians, along with the architecture of their buildings, was akin to that of Middle Eastern countries on Earth. (TOS: "Wolf in the Fold")


== History ==
Ancient times on Argelius were described as violent, with many of the planet's original laws described as "horrible" and "barbaric". One such law called for the execution of murderers through death by slow torture.
In 2067, the Argelians experienced what they call the "Great Awakening". In this awakening, they united under a planetary government and created a legal system that was based on love. This government was headed by a Prefect. The seat of government was located in a chief city. Due to inefficiencies in their government, people from other planets were hired to fill certain administrative positions.
Prior to stardate 3619, Argelius II signed a treaty with the Federation wherein Starfleet could use the planet as a space port for their space vehicles and crews from the ships could take shore leave on the planet. The port had strategic value for it was the only one in its quadrant. For male crew members, the Argelian women were considered one of the highlights. (TOS: "Wolf in the Fold")
Christine Chapel once had what she thought was a casual relationship with a girl on Argelius II, which ended in a "misunderstanding" that led to her being chased by live phaser fire. (SNW: "Spock Amok")
In 2267, the Prefect was Jaris. In that year, the planet was the scene of several murders committed by the entity known as Redjac. Captain Kirk and Lieutenant Commander Scott both enjoyed several visits to the planet, though Scott was framed for the murders during his first visit. (TOS: "Wolf in the Fold"; TNG: "Relics")
Scott later recalled the incident on Argelius II in a conversation with Ensign Kane during his visit aboard the Enterprise-D in 2369, referring to it as "a wee bit of trouble." (TNG: "Relics")


== Stellar cartography ==

The planets Mars and Alpha Eridani II were on a direct alignment between Argelius II and Earth. (TOS: "Wolf in the Fold")
In 2364, the location of Argelius II was labeled on a star chart filed in the USS Enterprise-D library computer. This chart included the location of The Jewel Stars, a stellar cluster located approximately 100 light years from this planet.  (TNG: "Datalore", "Conspiracy" production art)