Planet 0042692 was the Federation designation for a class M planet that was located somewhere in the Alpha or Beta Quadrant. It was the homeworld of the Enderprizians, a pre-warp humanoid species, as well as of the wood leech. The planet's surface featured stretches of relatively flat highland interspersed with sunken regions of extremely rugged topography, which contained forests and many sheer pinnacles of rock. The planet had four moons and was rich in dilithium crystals.

Around 2268, the shuttlecraft Galileo from the USS Enterprise, piloted by Ensign David Garrovick on a solo mission, crashed in a cave on Planet 0042692. As warp plasma leaking from the damaged shuttle was reacting with ambient dilithium and poisoning the surrounding landscape, Garrovick made first contact with the local indigenous people to warn them of the danger. Garrovick soon died on the planet; the natives he assisted patterned their society after his accounts of the Enterprise and came to call themselves the "Enderprizians". Starfleet did not return to the sector for over a century.
In 2384, the USS Protostar detected Garrovick's distress signal and made second contact with the Enderprizians in their settlement of New Enda-Prize. After Dal R'El and Huur'A were afflicted by a fatal illness that the Enderprizians called a curse from "The Gallows", Gwyn, Rok-Tahk, and Jankom Pog ventured into the forest and discovered the wreck of the Galileo. Once the source of the disease was known, Zero was able to synthesize an antidote. The Protostar crew then enlisted the aid of the Enderprizians to rescue their crewmates from the Galileo shortly before it exploded. With the source of the contamination neutralized, the Enderprizians reopened their settlement to the outside world. (PRO: "All the World's a Stage")
Evidently, this second contact resulted in the Enderprizians establishing a relationship with the Federation at large as several months later, an Enderprizian was in a science class with Rok-Tahk as the new warrant officer was receiving basic training at Starfleet Academy. (PRO: "Supernova, Part 2")