Bareil Antos was a prominent Bajoran spiritual leader during the years immediately after the Cardassian Occupation of Bajor. He was the leading candidate to become the next kai after Opaka, but withdrew his candidacy shortly before the election took place, clearing the way for the elevation of Winn Adami to kai. He later played an important role in the negotiation of the first Bajoran-Cardassian Treaty, but died during the negotiations.


== Early life ==
Bareil spent his early years living under the yoke of Cardassian rule. He grew up in the Relliketh refugee camp. (DS9: "Shadowplay")
At the age of five, Bareil met a Bajoran monk who grabbed him the first time on his ear, to feel his pagh. As a chronic misbehaver, Bareil became his favorite victim and the monk was able to "virtually squeeze the pagh out of his ear with his thumb and forefinger." (DS9: "In the Hands of the Prophets")
During the waning years of the Occupation, Bareil became a gardener at the Bajoran Monastery of the Kai and his own goal was to plant the most beautiful Feloran bromeliads on the planet. However, he eventually devoted his life to the Prophets, becoming a vedek. (DS9: "In the Hands of the Prophets")


== Career ==
Bareil was an unorthodox Vedek. Bajorans with more traditional beliefs considered him to have a way of "taking a prophecy and showing that it can mean exactly the opposite of the accepted interpretation." After Kai Opaka left Bajor in 2369, Bareil became the leading candidate to replace her in that role – he was Opaka's personal choice and was popular in the Assembly. Bareil spent the time before the election in seclusion, but was drawn to space station Deep Space 9 by his opponent, Winn Adami. He decided to visit the station after a school, run by Keiko O'Brien, was bombed by Bajoran fundamentalists who were against her teaching that the wormhole prophets were aliens. Bareil hoped to act as a peace mediator. While Bareil was aboard the station, Neela, a Bajoran crew member of DS9, attempted to assassinate him. The assassination attempt was really engineered by Vedek Winn, who wished to be kai and who wanted to eliminate her rival, Bareil. The attempt failed – although Winn's connection to it never came to light publicly – and Bareil was favored to be the next kai. (DS9: "In the Hands of the Prophets", "Shadowplay")
Bareil aided Major Kira Nerys in exposing a plot to overthrow the Bajoran Provisional Government by Jaro Essa and the Alliance for Global Unity, who were unwittingly being aided by the Cardassians. Kira was hurt in a shuttle crash as she was trying to deliver evidence of the plot to the Chamber of Ministers. Bareil sent his aides to rescue Kira, had her wounds tended to at his monastery, and helped disguise her and Jadzia Dax as monks. Bareil accompanied the women to the Chamber of Ministers, where they presented evidence that foiled Jaro's coup. (DS9: "The Siege")

When Bareil was tied to the infamous Kendra Valley Massacre, he withdrew from consideration for kai, and Vedek Winn was elected. No one outside of Kira Nerys and a few other members of the DS9 crew knew that Bareil had taken the blame for Kai Opaka's role in the massacre. She had allowed her own son and forty-two other Bajorans to be killed during the Occupation to prevent over 1,200 deaths in the Kendra Valley. Bareil took the fall to protect Opaka's memory, although Kira acknowledged that he was too honorable a man to avoid facing the consequences of his mistakes. (DS9: "The Collaborator")

In 2371, Bareil visited the station to celebrate the Bajoran Gratitude Festival. He became infected by Zanthi fever, which Lwaxana Troi had transmitted to those at the station party. This caused misplaced amorousness in people who had been near her, and caused latent, subconscious attraction to others. Bareil amorously chased Dax, became jealous of Benjamin Sisko, and hit Sisko; Dax subsequently punched Bareil. Doctor Bashir was able to cure him of the fever. (DS9: "Fascination")

After the election, Bareil joined Winn as her key adviser in negotiating the Bajoran-Cardassian Treaty. Bareil negotiated for five months with Legate Turrel. Just before the final treaty negotiations, he was injured in a plasma explosion on board a Bajoran transport. Dr. Bashir was able to bring him back from the brink of death, but needed to expose him to dangerous levels of neurogenic radiation in order to do so. Bashir told the vedek that he should be placed in stasis for an indefinite period of time, until a cure for the radiation damage could be developed. Bareil insisted that Bashir find another solution, so he could remain conscious to help Winn. Bareil believed the Prophets had spared him in the explosion so that he could ensure the success of the peace talks. Dr. Bashir, on the orders of Bareil, gave him an experimental drug that let him function for a few days. However, the drug did irreversible damage to the vedek's organs, leading to their replacement with implants. In spite of this, the damage spread, destroying part of his brain. At Kira's urging, Bashir replaced the damaged brain region with an artificial  positronic implant, so that Bareil could continue to advise Winn. Soon after the peace treaty was signed, the remainder of Bareil's brain was destroyed. After Bashir gently refused to proceed with any further surgeries, saying he would fight Kira if he had to, Kira and Bashir decided to allow him to die, rather than replace his entire brain with a machine, for Bashir believed that, though Bareil would still look and talk like his old self, he wouldn't be himself. With Kira at his side, Bareil died shortly thereafter. (DS9: "Life Support")


== Personal life ==

Even after becoming a vedek, Bareil still loved to tend his garden. He also enjoyed playing springball. (DS9: "Shadowplay") He became romantically involved with Major Kira Nerys in 2370, after meeting her during a visit to Deep Space 9. (DS9: "Shadowplay") Unlike his rival Vedek Winn, Antos was amicable towards the United Federation, as demonstrated with his public effort to promote interaction between Bajorans and other species that wanted to learn and trade with them. (DS9: "In the Hands of the Prophets")
During the attempted coup led by Jaro Essa, Bareil's relationship with Kira started to blossom. After Kira was dismissed by Jaro from the space station, she stayed at Bareil's monastery. On Bajor, Kira and Bareil grew close, and Bareil allowed Kira to consult one of the Bajoran Orbs for guidance. She had a vision that showed her and Bareil as lovers. (DS9: "The Circle") Bareil and Kira subsequently became lovers until his death. (DS9: "The Siege", "Life Support") 

Following his death, when Kira's next love interest, Shakaar Edon, shared with Odo his feelings for Kira, Odo attempted to mislead him into believing that he thought that she was still grieved for Vedek Bareil. Shakaar respected that point, understanding it to only be natural, as he believed patience was the best thing he could do, but quickly reconsidered, and suggested that perhaps he should let her know how he felt, so as to help her get over her loss of Bareil. (DS9: "Crossfire") When Gul Dukat later learned of Kira's relationship with Shakaar, he recalled her previous relationship with Vedek Bareil, noting, "[y]ou do like powerful men, don't you?" (DS9: "Return to Grace")
When it was revealed by Odo that he had feelings for Kira, she recollected all of the times she came to him for advice about both Bareil and Shakaar, expressing how hard it must have been for Odo to listen to her go on about another man. Odo, nevertheless, expressed his discomfort with the scenario, but maintained that he did so because he wanted to be a good friend to her. (DS9: "Children of Time")
Later, in 2375, when it seemed as though Odo was going to die from Section 31's morphogenic virus, he asked Kira to leave his side, explaining "[y]ou watched Bareil die in this very room and I know how that's haunted you," before expressing his desire for her not to experience the same with him there, too. (DS9: "Extreme Measures")