Furel was a member of the Shakaar resistance cell and an intimate friend of Lupaza.
In 2355, Furel met young Kira Nerys, who wanted to join the resistance. Although he and the rest of the cell found Kira too young, Lupaza stood up for her. When he made jokes about Kira, he was often hit by Lupaza for doing so.
Several years later, when Kira Taban, Nerys' father, was driven from his homestead and mortally wounded by the Cardassians, Furel accompanied her to take revenge against the Ninth Order. Afterwards, and standing by her father's grave, Furel asked Nerys whether he should get the others for a ceremony, but she declined, and told him she wanted to attack the Cardassians again right away. (DS9: "Ties of Blood and Water")
At some point of time after that, before a mission to rescue a number of his comrades, Furel prayed to the Prophets, offering his own life in exchange for success in saving his endangered friends. The mission was a success, but Furel lost his left arm. Furel felt the Prophets had been generous and, years later, he declined a Federation doctor's offer of a replacement, believing it would have been an ungrateful act to the Prophets. After the Occupation of Bajor ended, he went on to become a farmer.
In 2371, Shakaar refused to return soil reclamators to Kai Winn, who had become acting first minister of Bajor. When Winn sent the Bajoran Militia to arrest Shakaar, Furel – together with Lupaza, Kira, and most of the other former members of the Shakaar resistance cell – joined Shakaar in resisting the kai. (DS9: "Shakaar")
In 2373, Furel visited Kira on starbase Deep Space 9 with Lupaza, because someone was killing their former resistance comrades. After stowing away aboard a transport ship they sneaked aboard DS9 unnoticed by beaming directly into Chief O'Brien's bedroom, their assailant, Silaran Prin, knew where they were and planted an explosive device on the station's window, by means of a hunter probe. When it exploded, the room decompressed and Furel was killed, as was Lupaza. (DS9: "The Darkness and the Light")