The Aenar were a subspecies of Andorians native to the Northern Wastes of Andoria. Their population during the mid-22nd century consisted of only a few thousand.


== Physiology ==
The Aenar were physiologically very similar to the Andorians. Like Andorians, they had two antennae, although those of the Aenar had small indentations in the funnel-shaped tips. They had no skin or hair pigmentation, resulting in a pale ice-blue/white appearance similar to an albino. (ENT: "The Aenar")

Many, if not all, Aenar were completely blind, yet had the ability to see via telepathy. (ENT: "The Aenar") Their other senses not only compensate for their blindness, but are actually notably superior compared to those of most other humanoids. (SNW: "Children of the Comet")
The most distinctive trait of the Aenar were their highly evolved telepathic abilities. An Aenar was capable of reading minds and of psychically projecting itself to other humanoids. They used telepathy to communicate amongst themselves. Their telepathic abilities also allow them to resist telepathy-based mind control to some degree. Aenar also possessed a limited form of precognition. (ENT: "The Aenar"; SNW: "Children of the Comet", "The Elysian Kingdom")

They were genetically compatible with Andorians; Aenar Jhamel and Andorian Shran had a child, Talla. She appeared to have fully functional eyesight, but it is unknown whether she inherited the Aenar superior senses and telepathy. (ENT: "These Are The Voyages...")


== Society and culture ==

The Aenar of the 22nd century lived in an underground compound on Andoria shielded by a dampening field. They had no leader but would appoint an authorized delegate known as a Speaker if a situation warranted it. The Aenar had a strict law against reading the minds of other people without prior consent. They had a strictly pacifist ideology and deplored violence.
The Aenar believed that death only came after one had fulfilled their life's meaning. (SNW: "Memento Mori")


== History ==
The Aenar were considered a myth in Andorian society until 2104, when the Andorians rediscovered the Aenar living in the Northern Wastes of Andoria. Afterwards, the Aenar maintained diplomatic contact with the Andorian government, though they remained extremely secretive. Shran claimed he could count on one hand the number of Andorians who had seen one face-to-face.
In 2154, the Aenar became involved in interstellar affairs when one individual, Gareb, was kidnapped by the Romulan Star Empire. Using telepresence, the Romulans used Gareb to remotely pilot an experimental drone ship.
With the help of Gareb's sister Jhamel, Enterprise NX-01 was able to disrupt and destroy the drone ship. (ENT: "The Aenar")
By 2259, at least one Aenar, Hemmer, served in Starfleet. (SNW: "Strange New Worlds")


== People ==
Named
Gareb
Hemmer
Jhamel
Lissan
Talla (half Andorian)
Unnamed
See:  Unnamed Aenar