The Antedians were an intelligent humanoid species from the planet Antede III. They were capable of spaceflight.


== Physiology ==
Antedians were fish-like in appearance, but of similar size as many other humanoids and capable of bipedal motion. They ate fish like vermicula. Worf considered them to be "a handsome race," whereas Lwaxana Troi stated that the "last time [she] saw something like that it was being served on a plate." Their minds were highly susceptible to telepathic reading. (TNG: "Manhunt")
The color of their scales varied, and included purple, blue and yellow. The shape of the head fins could vary as well. (TNG: "Manhunt"; DIS: "Jinaal") Some Antedians had a pair of prominent barbels on their chins. (TNG: "Manhunt")
Antedians found spaceflight extremely traumatic and survived the ordeal by entering a self-induced catatonic state. Upon arrival at the end of a voyage, Antedians required great quantities of food to replenish their bodies. (TNG: "Manhunt")


== History ==

Most Antedians were somewhat reclusive, and by the 2360s few Humans had seen an Antedian in the flesh. (TNG: "Manhunt")

An Antedian was present on the Baraam space station in the early 24th century. (Star Trek: Section 31)
In 2365, the civilization was offered membership in the United Federation of Planets. The USS Enterprise-D escorted two Antedian dignitaries to a conference on the planet Pacifica. Here, the Antedians were to be given a formal opportunity to join the Federation. However, immediately prior to transport down to Pacifica it was revealed, by Ambassador Troi, that they were in fact assassins and their robes were lined with ultritium. They had planned on blowing up the entire conference. They were detained on the Enterprise. (TNG: "Manhunt")

In 2381, some Antedians resided on Starbase 25. Beckett Mariner referred to them as "fish people", to which one of them who overheard the comment replied, "Hey, we're not people!" (LD: "An Embarrassment Of Dooplers")
An Antedian delegate was present at the Federation Headquarters in 3191 and attended the Millennium Celebration. (DIS: "Red Directive", "Jinaal") Later that year, that delegate was also a guest at the wedding of President T'Rina and Ambassador Saru. (DIS: "Life, Itself")


== People ==
List of unnamed Antedians