The Benzites were a warp-capable humanoid species from the Beta Quadrant. They were native to the Federation planet Benzar.


== History and society ==
Benzite contact with the Federation was limited prior to the 24th century, but by 2364, contact had widened. As a result, Mordock, creator of the Mordock Strategy, became the first Benzite to join Starfleet Academy, edging out several candidates from Federation worlds, including Wesley Crusher. (TNG: "Coming of Age")
Relations and cooperation between the Benzites and the Federation continued to expand during this time, possibly as a prelude toward Benzar joining the Federation. Officer exchange programs were initiated, allowing Starfleet officers to serve on Benzite ships and vice versa, in order to promote better understanding of the different cultures, regulations, and behaviors. Following in Mordock's footsteps, other Benzites, such as Hoya, eventually enrolled in the Academy. (TNG: "A Matter Of Honor"; DS9: "The Ship")
Benzites were highly meticulous, a characteristic that was reflected in their regulations, one of which stated that no officer on a Benzite ship is to report any unexplained occurrence without providing a full analysis and solution. (TNG: "A Matter Of Honor")
In 2374, during the Dominion War, Benzar was captured by Dominion and Cardassian forces. It was later liberated by Romulans, acting as part of the Federation Alliance. However, Constable Odo expressed concerns that the Romulans would not give up control of Benzar even after the war ended, as it was very rare for them to give up captured territory. (DS9: "The Reckoning")


== Physiology ==

Benzites typically had smooth, hairless, blue or green skin. A thick protrusion of the Benzite skull extended down over the face, displaying a prominent nasal lobe and brow. Two facial tendrils drooped down from above the upper lip. They were unable to breathe a standard oxygen/nitrogen atmosphere, and as of the 2360s, were required to wear a breathing apparatus in those environments. Some Benzites were able to go without any visible breathing apparatus by the early 2370s, but other Benzites still wore the standard apparatus as late as 2381. (TNG: "Coming of Age"; DS9: "The Ship"; LD: "Second Contact", "Room for Growth") 
Benzites also had two opposable thumbs on each hand, another unique characteristic of the species. (TNG: "Coming of Age", "A Matter Of Honor")

Benzites were known to develop from a series of large geostructures; those from the same geostructure naturally looked similar. Benzites within these geostructures had the inherent ability to distinguish each other, all of whom would otherwise appear identical to outsiders.
In 2365, when Benzite exchange officer Mendon transported aboard the USS Enterprise-D, Acting Ensign Wesley Crusher noted that he looked identical to Mordock, whom he had met the previous year. (TNG: "A Matter Of Honor")


== People ==
Named
Hoya
Mendon
Mordock
Unnamed
Unnamed Benzites