The Bolians were a humanoid species who were native to the planet Bolarus IX.


== History and politics ==
The Bolians underwent a period of history known as the Middle Ages. (VOY: "Death Wish")
As of 2151, Bolians had encountered Ferengi. (ENT: "Acquisition")
By the 23rd century, Bolians were associated with the Federation, with several officers serving in Starfleet. A Bolian was among the casualties in the crash of the Federation medical frigate USS Hiawatha in 2256, during the Federation-Klingon War. (DIS: "Brother") Another Bolian, Zier, served on the USS Enterprise in 2259 as an ensign. (SNW: "Spock Amok")
By 2366, the Bolians were maintaining an uneasy truce with the Moropa. (TNG: "Allegiance")

In the 2360s and 2370s, Bolians were prominent in high-ranking positions in the Federation and in Starfleet, including as Academy commandant in 2372, as well as an active Federation ambassador by 2369. (TNG: "Conspiracy"; DS9: "The Forsaken", "Paradise Lost") Bolians were among the hundreds of different humanoid species living on Earth as of the 2370s. (DS9: "Homefront", "Paradise Lost"; VOY: "Non Sequitur", "Hope and Fear")
Bolian territory was a hotbed between the Federation and the Dominion during the Dominion War. A front was established by the Sixth Fleet in 2374 to prevent Dominion forces from taking the Bolian border and outlying colonies. Starfleet developed a new strategy during the war on the Bolian front which was known as the Bolian Operation. (DS9: "Behind the Lines", "The Reckoning", "Penumbra")


== Physiology ==

Bolians were distinctively known for a bifurcating (cartilaginous) ridge running vertically along the center of the head and face, and partway down the chest. Skin color ranged from light green-blue to blue-gray to vivid blue and was occasionally accented with dark blue bands on the head.

Both Bolian males and females were predominately bald. However, there were the occasional few who had hair. (TNG: "Allegiance", "Ménage à Troi"; VOY: "Ashes to Ashes"; PRO: "Preludes") They were on average as tall as the average Human, and were not known for their physical prowess. (DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi") Bolians have been known to wear toupées on occasion. (DS9: "The Muse")
In addition to the ridge on their heads, they were also noted for having cartilaginous lining on their tongues that allowed them to consume foods not normally palatable by other races, including strong acids. (VOY: "Flashback") One such example of traditional Bolian cuisine was the consumption of meat that had been allowed to partially decay. (DS9: "Crossfire")
The Doctor was particularly interested in the topic of the Bolian digestive system, and put together a piece on the topic in Hints for Healthful Living – a part of the daily USS Voyager morning show, A Briefing with Neelix. (VOY: "Investigations")

Bolian hearts were on the right side of their body. This was where Zim Brott was shot by the serial killer Chu'lak in 2375. (DS9: "Field of Fire") A Bolian heart could be hooked up to an injured Betelgeusian's heart, a procedure Jett Reno used to keep "Valentine" alive in 2256. (DIS: "Brother")

When removed from the body, Bolian blood was blue. (DS9: "The Adversary"; LD: "Temporal Edict". The chemistry of their blood was very different from Vulcans. If a blood transfusion was given from a Vulcan to a Bolian it would result in the death of the Bolian. (VOY: "Prototype")
Intimate relations between Bolians and Humans typically caused adverse effects to the latter, which might include fatigue, nausea, and joint inflammation. (VOY: "Life Line")


== Society and culture ==

A Bolian medical philosophy on euthanasia was developed during their Middle Ages known as the "double effect" principle. This form of assisted suicide stated that "an action that has the principal effect of relieving suffering may be ethically justified even though the same action has the secondary effect of possibly causing death." (VOY: "Death Wish")
Bolian courtship initiation consisted of a male and female Bolian pressing foreheads with eyes closed, while both participants touched the neck of their partner with both hands, placing the fingers where one would check the pulse of a species with a circulatory system similar to that of Humans. (VOY: "Someone to Watch Over Me") Bolian marriages were sometimes polyamorous. Any additional spouse was referred to as a "co-husband" or "co-wife", respectively. (DS9: "Field of Fire") During a pregnancy, they believed that if one gave birth near a warp core, the experience improved the baby's disposition. (VOY: "Lineage")
Bolian individuals tended to be highly outspoken, even when it was not requested. (TNG: "Ensign Ro", et. al.) Due to the "good nature" personality types often perceived in Bolians, they were often accustomed to working in various service professions. Bolian barbers and waiters were employed aboard the USS Enterprise-D during its mission. (TNG: "Data's Day", et al.) Captain Janeway once encountered the personality of an assimilated Bolian manicurist during a discussion with Seven of Nine. (VOY: "Infinite Regress") Bolian shop owners and restaurateurs maintained a presence on the Promenade of Deep Space 9. (DS9: "Shadowplay", "Resurrection", "Crossfire")
A form of greeting involved extending the hand as if for a Human handshake, but with the palm down and the fingers curved part way. (TNG: "Conspiracy")
Bolian-written histories of 21st century Earth took special notice of the allegedly poor state of Human plumbing during that time period. (VOY: "11:59")


=== Language ===

The Human name Frederick bore a close resemblance to an impolite Bolian term. (VOY: "Dreadnought")


=== Cuisine ===
Bolian food, to non-Bolians, sounded very unappetizing (although it was tasty), as in some dishes, preparation involved the use of aged meat. (DS9: "Crossfire")

List of foods and beverages

Bolian soufflé
Bolian tomato soup
Bolian tonic water


=== People ===
List of Bolians
Alandra (hologram)


== Economy and trade ==

The Bank of Bolias was the primary financial institution of the Bolians and many off-worlders.
Fluctuations in Bolian currency played an important role in Alpha Quadrant trade. In 2371, Quark, the Ferengi trade intermediary between the Karemma and the Federation, discussed Bolian currency fluctuations with Hanok. (DS9: "Starship Down")
The Bolians were among many Federation races that took advantage of the starbase Deep Space 9 and the Bajoran wormhole. Bolian vessels frequently conducted trade through the station during the 2370s, often falling victim to nearby Maquis raids. (DS9: "Tribunal") In 2371, a Maquis ship disabled two Bolian freighters near the Demilitarized Zone and stole its shipment of photon launchers. (DS9: "The Maquis, Part I") The Maquis would again attack two Bolian freighters in 2373, stealing several thousand tons of rhodium nitrite and selenium. (DS9: "For the Uniform")
In 2373, the Bolians authorized the Ferengi Gaming Commission to manage their gambling emporiums. (DS9: "Ferengi Love Songs")
Bolian crystalsteel was a type of Bolian commodity. (DS9: "The Jem'Hadar")
An establishment curiously called The Red Bolian was located on Freecloud. (PIC: "Stardust City Rag")


=== Technology ===
Bolian freighter
Bolian vessel
Bolian transport