The Breen were a spacefaring humanoid species native to the planet Breen in the Alpha Quadrant. Notoriously reclusive and warlike, the Breen were a formidable power in their region of the galaxy. They almost always wore refrigeration suits that entirely concealed their bodies.


== History ==
The Klingons were among the first to discover that the Breen did not tolerate incursions into their space. During the Klingon Second Empire, Chancellor Mow'ga ordered an entire fleet of Klingon warships to invade and conquer the Breen homeworld. The fleet never returned and was never heard from again. (DS9: "'Til Death Do Us Part")
The Romulans' contact with the Breen led to their coining a saying: "Never turn your back on a Breen." (DS9: "By Inferno's Light")


=== 24th century ===
Even by the 24th century, much was still unknown about the Breen and their government, known as the Breen Confederacy. (DS9: "Strange Bedfellows", "The Dogs of War") The Federation had limited knowledge of the Breen, however, and was aware of Breen outposts located in Sector 97 in 2368. That same year, Starfleet feared the Breen might have attacked the science vessel SS Vico there. (TNG: "Hero Worship")
Breen privateers during the 24th century often conducted indiscriminate raids against other Alpha Quadrant species. This included the Breen attack and capture of a Cardassian Central Command vessel, the Ravinok, in 2366. The survivors of that attack were used for slave labor in Breen-operated dilithium mines on Dozaria. (DS9: "Indiscretion")
In 2370, the Breen participated in a palio held at Federation space station Deep Space 3, during which the Ferengi attempted to bribe a Breen pilot into deliberately losing the race. (TNG: "Interface")
In 2371, evidence seemed to briefly indicate that the Breen may have attacked another Federation space station, the Amargosa observatory, though the true aggressors were moments later, determined to have been Romulans. (Star Trek Generations) Nevertheless, by about this point, the Breen were considered one of the most warlike species known to the Federation. (VOY: "Elogium")

In 2372, the Breen captors on Dozaria were located by Kira Nerys and Gul Dukat. Dukat stated that he didn't approve of what the Breen were doing, by employing the survivors of the Ravinok as slaves but did "admire their ingenuity." The Breen guards were ambushed by him and Kira, so that they could free their prisoners, including Dukat's daughter, Tora Ziyal. (DS9: "Indiscretion") As a result of the years she spent at their mercy, Ziyal came to hate the Breen. (DS9: "Return to Grace") Later that year, Breen privateers raided the Bajoran colony of Free Haven; they were, however, successfully driven away by the USS Defiant. (DS9: "To the Death")
By 2373, the Cardassian Union maintained an embassy on the Breen homeworld. (DS9: "Return to Grace") The same year, Breen settlements on Portas V, near the Demilitarized Zone, dealt with the Maquis, supplying them with cold storage units. (DS9: "For the Uniform") In a conversation with Ziyal, Kira Nerys warned her friend that if she was to aid her father in his campaign against the Klingons, she would have to learn to hate her present enemies even more than she hated the Breen. (DS9: "Return to Grace")

Whereas a Breen individual was held captive by the Dominion at Internment Camp 371 in 2373 (before killing a couple of Jem'Hadar guards there and, in retaliation, being shot to death in that year), other species like the Ferengi had developed closer ties with the Breen by the late 24th century, as both species conducted trade negotiations in 2373. (DS9: "In Purgatory's Shadow", "By Inferno's Light", "Ferengi Love Songs") Once, in 2374, Ferengi engineer Rom referred to the Breen as one of the top three toughest mercenary species that he and his brother, Quark, could find (the others being Klingons and Nausicaans). Rom suggested including the Breen in a commando team which would be sent to rescue his and Quark's mother, Ishka, who was being held prisoner by the Dominion, but Quark declined the Breen's involvement, opting for the rescue operation to be attempted by Ferengi only. Ishka's captor, Vorta clone Yelgrun, considered Breen annoying, though not as much as Ferengi. (DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi")

It was noted by Ezri Dax in 2375, when she and Worf were captured by the Breen on the planet Goralis III, that they were a long way from Breen space. (DS9: "Penumbra") The Breen interrogated Worf and Dax, but the information which the pair consequently provided was somewhat confusing. (DS9: "'Til Death Do Us Part", "Strange Bedfellows") In Worf's opinion, the Breen were not only dangerous but also had no honor. (DS9: "'Til Death Do Us Part")
In 2380, Lieutenant Barbara Brinson suspected Ensign Beckett Mariner of being a Breen infiltrator. (LD: "Cupid's Errant Arrow")


==== Alliance with the Dominion ====
Main article: Breen-Dominion Alliance

Meanwhile, Breen representative Thot Gor had been extensively conversing over subspace with the Female Changeling, the leader of the Dominion, in discussions that she found to be particularly productive. (DS9: "Strange Bedfellows") The Breen were of no personal interest to her other than the military advantage they could provide against the Federation Alliance in the Dominion War, in which the Female Changeling was determined to lead the Dominion to victory. (DS9: "The Changing Face of Evil") In 2375, the Breen moved from a policy of low-level hostilities toward most other major powers to one of open warfare when they allied themselves with the Dominion as reinforcements. (DS9: "'Til Death Do Us Part", "Strange Bedfellows") To mark the historic moment when the two parties first met in person, the Breen presented Worf and Ezri Dax as gifts to the Dominion. (DS9: "'Til Death Do Us Part")

According to the terms of alliance, the Breen Confederacy received several planets in the Cardassian Union as compensation for joining the war. Despite being welcomed by the Female Changeling and Vorta leader Weyoun, the Breen were mistrusted by the leader of the Cardassian Union, Legate Damar, who was frustrated by the details of their treaty with the Dominion. For instance, the Breen were thereafter allowed unlimited access to the Dominion's database, whereas Damar was annoyed at them being permitted to use it at all. His frustration over how the Breen were being received led Damar to begin a Cardassian rebellion against the Dominion and enable Ezri Dax and Worf to escape back to Federation space. (DS9: "Strange Bedfellows") Even for the Cardassian rebels, the addition of the Breen made the Dominion more formidable than ever. (DS9: "The Changing Face of Evil")

Shortly after joining with the Dominion, the Breen attacked Earth, assaulting Starfleet Headquarters and destroying the nearby Golden Gate Bridge. Most of the Breen attack force was destroyed by Starfleet, though the majority of the damage on Earth had been done by that time.

The Breen were so secretive that the only thing Starfleet knew about them, up to then, was that they were a race of warriors, an aspect of the Breen which the Klingons learned in light of their attack on Earth, as not even the Klingons had ever attempted such a strike. Even Weyoun and Damar considered the Breen to be "full of surprises," albeit for different reasons. (DS9: "The Changing Face of Evil")

A short time later, the Breen assisted Dominion forces in breaking the lines at Chin'toka, launching a counteroffensive against the Federation Alliance there and breaking through in two places. To Rom's son, Starfleet Ensign Nog, the Breen now seemed unstoppable, though Worf refuted this opinion, believing that every foe could somehow be overcome. A major battle which followed, known as the Second Battle of Chin'toka, was won by the Dominion thanks to a unique Breen device, a kind of energy-dampening weapon which could completely drain all the main power systems of a starship. Those vessels which were destroyed by the Breen weapon during the battle included the USS Defiant. (DS9: "The Changing Face of Evil") In fact, the only ship immune to the weapon was a Klingon Bird-of-Prey, the IKS Ki'tang, which serendipitously survived thanks to an adjustment the chief engineer had made to the ship's tritium intermix in the warp core. (DS9: "When It Rains...") Under orders from the Female Changeling, the Breen allowed escape pods to carry Federation survivors to safety (believing they would sow fear in the enemy ranks after what they had witnessed), and the Breen were thanked for the decisive part they had served in the battle. (DS9: "The Changing Face of Evil") Both this defeat and the Breen's devastating assault on Earth dealt a huge blow to the Federation Alliance's morale. (DS9: "The Changing Face of Evil", "When It Rains...") The Breen were also being used to defend numerous Dominion facilities. (DS9: "When It Rains...")

Breen engineers were assigned to begin retrofitting Dominion ships with the energy-dampening weapon. The engineers were instructed to accelerate the installation program, an order that had been sent from the Female Changeling and was relayed to the engineers by Thot Pran, a Breen official. According to one report (from Kelvas V), the Breen would start installing the weapon on Jem'Hadar fighters within a week. (DS9: "Tacking Into the Wind") Although the Klingon fleet was able to make the needed adjustments against the weapon, the Federation and the Romulans were still unable to defend against the Breen. (DS9: "When It Rains...", "The Dogs of War") Hence, the Breen were prevented from acquiring final victory for the Dominion only because the Klingon vessels were present. (DS9: "When It Rains...", "Tacking Into the Wind") When the Federation finally did create a defense against the energy-dampening weapon, they forced the Dominion fleet to retreat. Thot Pran expressed an extreme distaste for surrender, and required the reassurance of the Female Changeling that, instead of surrendering, they were actually regrouping and attempting to redouble their shipbuilding and replenishment efforts. (DS9: "The Dogs of War")

With the necessary countermeasures against the Breen's energy-dampening weapon obtained, the Federation Alliance was able to go on the offensive once again, choosing to try to invade Cardassia Prime itself. In hopes of raising the Breen's will to fight, the Female Changeling offered them control of Earth and Romulus if they succeeded in winning the battle. However, she then told Weyoun this was merely a political promise, designed just as motivation. While every Breen soldier on Cardassia was participating in a concerted search for Damar, the Breen, in the interest of maintaining their alliance with the Dominion, were positioned ahead of the Jem'Hadar by the Female Changeling, under pressure from Thot Pran.
During the ensuing Battle of Cardassia, the Breen were still able to inflict major casualties on the allies, even without the use of their energy-dampening weapon. Up to a third of the allies' entire fleet was destroyed during the battle, including the Romulan flagship, even though sabotage by the Cardassian rebellion resulted in the Dominion fleet being out of contact with their headquarters until midway through the battle. The Breen continued to fight for the Dominion until the end of the war, demonstrating a willingness to die for the cause which matched that of the Jem'Hadar. However, when the Cardassian forces switched sides mid-battle, the Dominion and Breen were forced to withdraw to Cardassia Prime. The Breen leaders left Dominion Headquarters in order to fight on the front lines, and both Damar and Weyoun were shot to death shortly thereafter. At the Dominion defense perimeter in orbit of the planet, the Breen were to be targeted by the Klingons, in a three-pronged attack that saw the Romulans, Cardassians and Starfleet focus on other targets.

After Odo convinced the Female Changeling to surrender, the Breen and their allies stood down, finally bringing an end to the Dominion War. As allies of the Dominion, Breen representatives were present during the signing of the Dominion War Declaration of Peace. (DS9: "What You Leave Behind")


==== Continued aggression ====

Despite ceasing open hostilities with other major Alpha and Beta Quadrant powers, by 2381 the Breen had made at least one incursion into the Delos system and occupied the planet Brekka. This incursion was accidentally discovered by the crew of the USS Cerritos. (LD: "Trusted Sources") However, it later emerged that Vice Admiral Les Buenamigo had prior knowledge of the Breen's presence on Brekka and had been setting the Cerritos up for a crisis that would "force" him to unveil the Texas-class USS Aledo. Cerritos captain Carol Freeman was outraged when she learned this, as Buenamigo's actions had needlessly put her crew in mortal danger. (LD: "The Stars At Night")
Before the Burn in the 31st century, there was some diplomatic contact between the Federation and the Breen, but no official contact afterwards. (DIS: "Erigah")


=== 32nd century ===
The Breen remained antagonists of the Federation in the 32nd century, by which time the Breen Confederacy had been succeeded by the Breen Imperium. In the late 32nd century, the Breen were embroiled in a civil war for control of the throne following the death of the Emperor. The factions were led by the six primarchs of the Yod-Thot royalty, among them Ruhn of the Sixth Flight and Tahal of the Third Flight. The Federation still had little information about the Breen beyond their hostile intentions. (DIS: "Red Directive", "Mirrors", "Erigah")
During the conflict, Primarch Tahal occupied the planet Kellerun for a time, despoiling its environment and decimating the native Kellerun population. (DIS: "Erigah")
Unbeknownst to the wider galaxy, the son of the late Emperor and scion of the Imperium, L'ak, had betrayed his uncle Ruhn for his Human lover Moll, and fled into exile under an erigah bounty. The pair worked as couriers until 3191, when they stumbled upon clues to a Progenitor technology of immense power. Hoping that this technology could buy their freedom from the Breen, they competed with the USS Discovery to find pieces of a map containing its location.
After Moll and L'ak were apprehended by Starfleet, a confrontation ensued at Federation Headquarters with Ruhn, who sought to seize them as L'ak represented his claim to the throne. During an escape attempt, L'ak fatally overdosed himself on tricordrazine. Ruhn was prepared to wage war on the Federation, until Moll revealed herself as L'ak's wife and promised to deliver the Progenitor technology to him. With no better options, the Federation reluctantly agreed to release her to the Breen. (DIS: "Mirrors", "Erigah")
The Discovery subsequently clashed with Ruhn's dreadnaught at the Eternal Gallery and Archive over the final piece of the map. Captain Michael Burnham surrendered the map to Ruhn in exchange for his tergun oath to spare the Archive. Though Ruhn had no intention of honoring his word, he was deposed shortly after by a mutiny led by Moll and Lieutenant Arisar. Moll took control of the dreadnaught and it's crew. However, Tahal attempted to take control of the Sixth Flight and add to to her Third Flight. During this time, Moll was able to find the portal to the Progenitor's technology. Unfortunately, after she unlocked the portal every Breen soldier sent inside disappeared without a trace. Discovery and one of its away team were able to jettison the portal back into space away from the dreadnaught. However, Moll and Captain Burnham entered the portal. (DIS: "Labyrinths", "Lagrange Point")
Enroute to Moll's location, Tahal was convinced to withdraw when Ambassador Saru revealed that Federation knew about her bases in the L'Tar Nebula and that nearby worlds would attack unless Saru ordered them to stand down. Tahal acquiesced to his demands and turned her fleet around. However, she sent a scout ship to observe the situation between Discovery and Ruhn's dreadnaught. During this time, Moll and one of her Breen soldiers attempted to take control of the technology. However, Burnham killed the Breen soldier, and Moll was knocked unconscious when she attempted to use the technology. Burnham discovered that the technology could clone Lak, it could not bring him back to life. To prevent Tahal's scout ship and Ruhn's remaining forces from seizing the technology, Discovery used its spore drive to send both the dreadnaught and the scout ship to the Galactic barrier where it would take them a couple of decades to return. (DIS: "Life, Itself")
In an alternate timeline where the USS Discovery failed to free itself from a Krenim chronophage in time to stop Moll and L'ak, the Progenitor technology came into Ruhn's possession. A few weeks later, the Breen launched a devastating attack on the Federation. In 3218, Ruhn's dreadnaught was stationed near the wreckage of Federation Headquarters and Discovery. (DIS: "Face the Strange", "Erigah")


== Biology ==

The Breen were hairless, pale green humanoids with two distinct forms: a solid form, and a gelatinous form in which their tissues were translucent and flexible. Breen culture taught that the gelatinous form was their true face, whereas the solid form represented a "weak" evolutionary throwback. (DIS: "Mirrors")

Breen internal physiology was quite different from that of most humanoids, and was largely unknown to Federation science even in the 32nd century. They had vital organs, but no blood or other liquid circulatory system. Exposure to a specific blend of subzero gases triggered a unique immune system response and somatic cell regeneration that could potentially allow a Breen to recover from life-threatening injuries. (DS9: "In Purgatory's Shadow"; DIS: "Erigah")
The Breen had male and female genders. They experienced pregnancy, often at a young age; newborn Breen were referred to as "hatchlings". (VOY: "Elogium"; DIS: "Erigah")

The thoughts and emotions of Breen were not detectable by telepaths such as Betazoids. (TNG: "The Loss")


=== Rumors ===
Even as late as the 32nd century, no one appeared to have seen a Breen outside of their suits, at least not without realizing it, as no one was aware that L'ak was actually a Breen due to L'ak never being seen using a refrigeration suit. According to Worf, no outsider had ever seen what a Breen looked like under their refrigeration suits and lived. (DS9: "'Til Death Do Us Part") Due to this, there were many rumors regarding Breen.
Even shortly before the Dominion War was concluded, their appearance remained so completely unknown to their allies that Weyoun could not avoid wondering what the Breen looked like. (DS9: "What You Leave Behind") Ezri Dax once had a dream that featured a male Breen taking off his helmet to reveal he was actually Julian Bashir.
Worf firmly concluded that the species didn't have claws, although Ezri Dax wasn't sure of this belief. She, on the other hand, speculated that the Breen might be covered in fur, due to their home planet purportedly having a remarkably cold climate. (DS9: "'Til Death Do Us Part") Dukat expected Dozaria's climate would be about fifty degrees too hot for the species, so he expressed extreme surprise at finding Breen guards on that planet. (DS9: "Indiscretion") However, while the intelligence reports available to Cardassian and Dominion leaders during the Dominion War reported their homeworld to be a frozen wasteland, Weyoun remarked (in his capacity as a diplomat) that the planet was really "quite comfortable." (DS9: "The Changing Face of Evil")


== Society and culture ==
Breen entertained and taught their offspring with nursery rhymes. A particular example of a Breen nursery rhyme was made up of a heterophonic, five-line verse with an alternating tetrameter and pentameter structure. These were nonsensical phrases, strung together because they rhymed (at least to the Breen). Breen music which accompanied this nursery rhyme was written on a Lyxian scale. (DS9: "For the Uniform")
Based on how algae paste tasted, Ezri Dax humorously speculated that the Breen were "horrible cooks." (DS9: "'Til Death Do Us Part")

Married Breen scarred themselves with matching symbols on their forearms. Marriage to a non-Breen was considered to be an "abomination", but even so the partners were legally entitled to stay together in life or death. (DIS: "Erigah")
Breen culture was rigidly hierarchal. (DIS: "Lagrange Point")
The Breen rank structure included the title thot, which was implied to be greater than that of a Cardassian legate. (DS9: "Strange Bedfellows") Other Breen worked as engineers, including at least four at the Kelvas facility. (DS9: "Tacking Into the Wind") The Breen Imperium of the 32nd century was ruled by a royal caste called the Yod-Thot, which included the primarchs. Ruhn was described as being "Breen Primarch of the Sixth Flight." (DIS: "Mirrors") The Breen were originally ruled by a Breen Emperor, but after the last emperor's death the disparate branches of the royal bloodline began making competing claims for the throne, resulting in a civil war between six primarchs. Ruhn's nephew L'ak was the last direct descendant of the emperor and as such, he was considered to be the Scion of the Breen Imperium. If one of the primarchs could control L'ak, they would have a legitimate claim to the throne. (DIS: "Erigah") Moll - the wife of L'ak - was treated with respect by most Breen she encountered because of her marriage, with one even protesting to Ruhn's orders for them to detain Moll, although the primarch considered the union between his nephew and Moll to be an abomination.
According to Commander Rayner, genocide was a necessity to the Breen and their version of the Prime Directive. (DIS: "Erigah")

Breen medics, at least in the 32nd century, could be distinguished by a glowing symbol in the middle of their armor. (DIS: "Erigah")
The Breen hold great reverence for their culture and history. (DIS: "Labyrinths") They have at least two known oath: a blood bounty called erigah which could only be released by the Breen themselves (DIS: "Mirrors"); and a sacred oath called a tergun, where they swear upon the actions and the subjects within those words (and only within those), and breaking such an oath could cause the oath breaker to be hunted down by the other Breen for their dishonor. (DIS: "Labyrinths")
A sarkaress was a Breen feast day. Multiple Breen going together were referred to as sarkmates and would partake in an oil bath together, something that seemed to be sexual in Breen culture. (DIS: "Lagrange Point")


=== Treatment of prisoners ===

The Breen were known to use slave labor, and at least some of these slaves were captured in raids on other species. When the Breen were using Bajoran and Cardassian slaves to mine dilithium ore, there were always at least eight guards within the mines. (DS9: "Indiscretion")
The Breen were very prudent when dealing with prisoners. When capturing prisoners, the Breen typically stunned them from long range with their disruptors, rather than approaching them and risking close combat. When Worf and Ezri Dax were discovered by the Breen on Goralis while sleeping, the Breen used this technique to subdue them. The Breen also fed their prisoners a diet of algae paste. (DS9: "Penumbra", "'Til Death Do Us Part")
Aboard starships, the Breen typically sent in three guards at a time when they wished to remove a single prisoner from a cell that was being shared with other prisoners. Although Worf made various attempts at escape, they all failed, including an attempt to persuade the Breen guards that Ezri was sick, as well as an attempt to short-circuit the door of their cell. When Worf attempted to attack the Breen guards, they used a type of neural truncheon to paralyze him. Even after he fell to the ground, partially paralyzed, two Breen guards continued to use the truncheons on him to ensure he would not get back up, before two guards removed Ezri from the cell. (DS9: "'Til Death Do Us Part") In another incident, Worf simply showed signs of anger towards Weyoun and was again shocked by the neural truncheon. (DS9: "Strange Bedfellows") On the other hand, a holographic Breen, enhanced by the Hirogen and participating in Iden's Rebellion of 2377, once helped restrain B'Elanna Torres, but did so in a way that was relatively very careful, taking Torres by the arm to a position where a force field could be activated around her. (VOY: "Flesh and Blood")
To extract information from captives, the Breen used cortical implants, despite the fact that they caused extreme mental and physical side effects to the recipient, including severe pain and hallucinations. (DS9: "'Til Death Do Us Part")


=== Language ===
See: Breen language


== Science and technology ==
Given that most known humanoid species lived on class M planets with an average temperature far above the supposed temperature of Breen, the Breen were largely thought to have had to develop refrigeration suits in order to co-exist with others. (DS9: "The Changing Face of Evil") Underneath the suits, the Breen typically existed in their fluid state, believing that they had evolved beyond their solid state, although they were capable of taking on both. (DIS: "Mirrors") Doctor Hugh Culber discovered in 3191 that the subzero gasses in the suits provoked a unique immune response in the Breen, triggering their somatic cellular regeneration. (DIS: "Erigah")
The Breen were known for their knowledge of sophisticated cold storage units, summed up in a statement Captain Benjamin Sisko once made: "If anyone knows how to keep things cold, it's the Breen." (DS9: "For the Uniform")

By 2373, the Breen were among multiple species known by Starfleet to use organic-based vessels. (VOY: "Scorpion") Some of their vessels were even believed to be fitted with cloaking devices. (TNG: "Hero Worship") During the mid-2370s, Breen interceptors utilized energy-dampening weapons. (DS9: "The Changing Face of Evil", et al.) The expediency with which the Breen could mobilize large fleets of ships surprised Damar. (DS9: "The Changing Face of Evil") The Breen's piloting skills likewise impressed Nog. (DS9: "What You Leave Behind")

The Breen were known to use type 3 disruptors, in common with the Romulans and Klingons. (Star Trek Generations) The Breen also manufactured a portable hand-held cannon, the CRM 114, which was designed to target moving objects and surface emplacements. It was among numerous weapons dealt by Ferengi arms dealer Gaila in the mid-2370s. (DS9: "Business as Usual") A holographic facsimile of a pistol was almost used by the holographic Breen in Iden's Rebellion, moments prior to that Breen being deactivated. (VOY: "Flesh and Blood") In the 32nd century, they were capable of manifesting large Breen rifles and Breen staffs which doubled as a weapon. (DIS: "Mirrors", "Erigah", "Labyrinths")

The Breen made use of memory-probing technology, in the form of cortical implants, and neural truncheons for subduing prisoners. (DS9: "Indiscretion", "'Til Death Do Us Part")
By the late 32nd century, the Breen possessed massive dreadnaught-class starships which were so enormous that they massively dwarfed even the USS Federation. The dreadnaughts were the Breen's most powerful warship class. (DIS: "Erigah")
Breen dreadnaughts were equipped with a powerful energy weapon. (DIS: "Labyrinths")
The Breen used base-duodeca coding which was really hard to hack and shield-tunneling technology to get soldiers through deflector shields. (DIS: "Labyrinths")


== Mirror universe ==
In the mirror universe, Intendant Kira once told Benjamin Sisko that Breen icicles were warmer than Professor Jennifer Sisko. (DS9: "Shattered Mirror")


== Individuals ==
Named
Gor
L'ak
Pran
Ruhn
Arisar
Tahal
Unnamed
Unnamed Breen


== Territory ==
See: Breen space