The Bynars were a race of cybernetically enhanced humanoids native to the planet Bynaus in the Beta Magellan system.


== Physiology ==
The Bynars were shorter in height than most humanoids and were genderless. They had lilac skin and enlarged skulls. Each Bynar had a patch of dark purple hair on both sides of their neck and asymmetrical ears. Their most definitive characteristic was that they were interconnected with a master computer on Bynaus. (TNG: "11001001") When a Bynar was born, a surgeon removed the child's parietal lobe and replaced it with a synaptic processor. (ENT: "Regeneration")
Bynars always worked and lived in pairs. There was a great degree of physical symmetry between each Bynar couple. For instance, each Bynar's pair of ears matched those of their partner, but were on the opposite sides of the head. Their typical clothing was also consistent in such a way. Because the Bynars were so interconnected with the master computer, their language and thought patterns became as close to binary code as possible. They could speak English, usually finishing each other's sentences. For example:

One Zero: "It is a great pleasure…"
Zero One: "…to work on such a large mobile computer."

The Bynars' primary language was a high-frequency sound, unintelligible to Humans, though the Bynars used it when they spoke to each other. Every Bynar was equipped with a buffer, which they carried at their waist, to manage this rate of information transfer and had a small metallic component on one side of their head. Each of these mechanisms had a red light which blinked on and off when the Bynars were communicating between one another. Each of the Bynars had the component on the opposite side of the head from their partner, yet another aspect of their symmetry when grouped.


== History ==
The development of the Bynar ability to constantly receive information but to store it, via their buffers, until it was necessary happened over a long period of time. (TNG: "11001001") By 2153, the Bynars had adopted their practice of replacing each of their newborns' parietal lobes with a synaptic processor. Doctor Phlox saw the procedure performed when he encountered the Bynars in the Beta Magellan system. In 2153, he remarked that the procedure had been "very impressive" and indirectly likened the Bynar way of life to, unknown at the time, a benign form of the Borg Collective. (ENT: "Regeneration")
In the 24th century, Starfleet employed Bynars to perform computer upgrades on its starships. A team of four Bynars was assigned to Starbase 74, under the supervision of Commander Quinteros. He appreciated the swiftness with which they carried out tasks.
The Bynars discovered that, although the extreme integration of technology into their society had tremendous benefits, it also had a few disadvantages. Due to the fact that an electromagnetic pulse from a supernova in their star system was due to knock out their planetary computer in 2364, the Bynars were left with only one choice: to temporarily deactivate the computer and transfer all the stored information, until after the pulse had passed.
The Bynars opted not to request that Starfleet assist in resolving the situation. This was because they thought in binary code, ones and zeroes, yes or no. Their need was so great they could not risk their appeal being rejected. Instead, since the USS Enterprise-D had the only mobile computer large enough to handle all the information from the planetary computer, the team of four Bynars stationed at Starbase 74 commandeered the vessel, during a computer refit. (TNG: "11001001")
A photograph of two Bynars were on Beckett Mariner's conspiracy board in 2380. (LD: "Cupid's Errant Arrow")
Beckett Mariner mentioned "bad Bynars" among the "types" she had dated. (LD: "We'll Always Have Tom Paris")
In 2381, a trio of Bynar lower deckers conspired with Nick Locarno to overtake their ship, joining Nova Fleet in the process. These Bynars would develop the trynar shield to protect the Fleet and later abandon Locarno after he endangered them by pursuing Beckett Mariner into an ion storm and the USS Cerritos breached the trynar shield with the Retribution. Because there were three of them, Mariner questioned how such a concept would work. (LD: "A Few Badgeys More", "Old Friends, New Planets")
USS Cerritos was retrofitted with Bynar developed components, protected by a Security Golem that can only be override with a sad story. (LD: "Upper Decks")
In 2384, a pair of Bynar scientists served aboard the USS Voyager-A. (PRO: "Ascension, Part I", "Ascension, Part II")


== Individuals ==
Named
Zero Zero
Zero One
One Zero
One One
Unnamed
Unnamed Bynars