The Cairn were a humanoid telepathic species who had no concept of spoken language. They were from the planet Cairn.


== Physiology ==
The Cairn were a humanoid species with no vocal cords. They relied on telepathy to communicate with one another. Their telepathy sent images rather than words, which allowed for a faster and more efficient exchange of information. As a result of their dependence on telepathy, the Cairn had evolved to the point where they no longer had the ability to speak. However, they still retained the biomechanics necessary for physical speech, suggesting that their lack of  vocal cords was a result of their reliance on telepathy rather than an evolutionary development.(TNG: "Dark Page")


== Society and Culture ==
Before interacting with the Federation, the Cairn had no concept of privacy, as their telepathic abilities allowed for open communication between individuals. Due to their unique form of communication, other telepathic species had difficulty communicating with the Cairn without proper training.(TNG: "Dark Page")


== History ==
In 2370, the USS Enterprise ferried a Cairn delegation to a meeting with the Federation Council. During the journey, Ambassador Lwaxana Troi was assigned to help the Cairn integrate with the Federation by both communicating with them telepathically and teaching them to communicate verbally with the help of vocal enhancers in the absence of vocal cords. This caused strain on her and that, coupled with working with Hedril, a Cairn youth, brought back painful memories involving the death of her daughter Kestra. (TNG: "Dark Page")


== Technology ==
The Cairn did not appear to have any notable technology that was mentioned during their interaction with the Federation. However, the vocal enhancers that were used to help the Cairn communicate verbally with non-telepathic species suggest that they may have had some level of technological development. (TNG: "Dark Page")


== People ==
Named
Hedril
Maques
Unnamed
Unnamed Cairn