The Caitians were a spacefaring feline humanoid species and long-standing members of the United Federation of Planets.


== History ==
Hundreds of years before the 24th century, Caitians hunted and ate Betazoids. After this practice was discontinued, the Caitians developed a synthetic substitute for Betazoid flesh. (LD: "Empathological Fallacies")
Caitians were attending Starfleet Academy by the early 2250s, and the Caitian homeworld was a Federation member with members on the Federation Council by 2286. (DIS: "Brother"; Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home) Caitians were present on Qualor II in 2381. (LD: "We'll Always Have Tom Paris")
In the alternate reality, Caitians were present on Earth by 2259. (Star Trek Into Darkness)


== Biology ==

Caitians exhibited feline features, such as short faces, triangular ears, large eyes with vertically slitted pupils, whiskers, fangs, and a tail. Most were entirely covered with fur that could be orange, brown, gray, or black, and could also be solid, multicolored, or patterned. Some Caitians had four fingers (including a thumb) on each hand, while others had five. There were also at least a few Caitians who had a very different, more Human-like appearance. (Star Trek: The Animated Series; Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home; Star Trek Into Darkness; Star Trek: Lower Decks; PRO: "Lost and Found")
When they needed to move quickly, Caitians could switch to quadrupedal locomotion, displaying feline agility and reaction times. They had sharp claws on their hands and feet, which led some to prefer going without footwear. Their claws could be used combatively, or to scale vertical surfaces, such as cliffs. (Star Trek: The Animated Series; LD: "Mugato, Gumato", "I, Excretus", "wej Duj"; PRO: "A Moral Star, Part 2")
Caitians possessed an extremely high pain tolerance, far more than most other humanoid species. Their bodies were also durable enough to withstand a phaser blast set to kill, even when already seriously injured. However, they were relatively sensitive to clingy heat, such as hot soup spilled on them. (LD: "Upper Decks")
The voices of some female Caitians had a soft purring quality. Agitated Caitians could also make a variety of cat-like hisses and yowls. (Star Trek: The Animated Series; Star Trek: Lower Decks)
Caitians experienced several hormonal cycles. One of these was the need to have sex once a year, or else their hormones would drive them crazy; this could be alleviated using a libido post. Caitian females had coital hooks as part of their reproductive anatomy. When stressed, Caitians enjoyed playing inside boxes. (LD: "No Small Parts", "We'll Always Have Tom Paris")
Caitians were mainly carnivorous, and skilled hunters. In the past, they had no qualms about hunting Betazoids, a fellow sentient race, for food. Caitian doctors took an oath not to consume their patients. Even so, they could still determine the specific presence of Betazoids just by scent and considered the smell to be delectable. By 2381, they had switched to consuming Synthetic Betazoid. (LD: "Empathological Fallacies")


== Individuals ==
Named
M'Ress
Shadowtrix
T'Ana
T'Illups (half-Human hybrid)
Unnamed
Unnamed Caitians