The Changelings were shapeshifting lifeforms  (in their natural state a liquid) native to the Gamma Quadrant of the Milky Way Galaxy. They were the creators and rulers of the Dominion, whose subject races knew them as the semi-mythical Founders. Most Changelings existed as an amalgamated mass known as the Great Link.


== Biology ==
The natural form of a Changeling was a viscous orange liquid containing a structure known as a morphogenic matrix. (DS9: "The Begotten") They contained morphogenic enzymes responsible for their shapeshifting ability. (DS9: "Things Past")
Changelings (or at least young and inexperienced ones, like Odo) had to revert to their natural liquid state to regenerate every sixteen to eighteen hours. Preventing them from doing so would cause severe physical distress and their forms to begin to deteriorate and "flake" away. (DS9: "The Forsaken", "The Storyteller", "The Alternate", "The Die is Cast", "In Purgatory's Shadow")

Changelings could take virtually any corporeal form. (DS9: "Chimera", "The Way of the Warrior") They, or at least the Founders, also could closely mimic humanoid personalities to the point where even close friends and family often could not distinguish them from the originals. (DS9: "By Inferno's Light", "Apocalypse Rising", "Paradise Lost") They could transform parts of themselves into smaller electrical devices, like a combadge, and make it operational, and were also capable of at least mimicking the shape and operation of a computer. (DS9: "Paradise Lost") Changelings could also mimic the form of fire and clouds. (DS9: "Chimera")

Starfleet sensors, as of 2371, failed to recognize Changelings when they mimicked other forms. (DS9: "The Adversary")

The Obsidian Order created a prototype quantum stasis field generator that could prevent a Changeling from shape-shifting. (DS9: "The Die is Cast")
Changelings could survive in the vacuum of space and were highly resistant to disruptor fire. (DS9: "Chimera", "Apocalypse Rising")

Changelings – or at least Odo – had no sense of smell. (DS9: "If Wishes Were Horses", "Improbable Cause") Laas stated, however, that if his hands had Klingon blood on them, they would emit a stench, possibly suggesting that after living among solids for years, he was at least familiar with the concept. (DS9: "Chimera")
Even when in humanoid form, Changelings did not need to take in sustenance. Odo noted that he once attempted to eat after assuming humanoid form for the first time, but found the experience not only unsatisfying due to his lack of taste buds but "messy" for reasons he chose not to elaborate. (DS9: "Meridian") Doctor Bashir once asked Odo for a sample of himself to study its value in possibly creating synthetic organs, which raised the question of how he would get that part of himself back if he never added matter to his body. (DS9: "When It Rains...")

The thoughts and emotions of Changelings could not be read by Betazoids. (DS9: "Fascination") However, memories could be telepathically transferred by a Guardian to one in the Trill Zhian'tara ritual, and they could participate as a past Trill host. (DS9: "Facets") A telepathic energy matrix (which caused the crew of Deep Space 9 to fight for control of that space station) was rejected by Odo's lack of a humanoid brain. It did have the ability to warp his face and knock him unconscious, though he retained his humanoid shape. (DS9: "Dramatis Personae")
However, on one occasion Odo was knocked out by being struck on the head. (DS9: "Vortex")
There was an apparent telepathic aspect to the Changeling species, evidenced in the fact Odo felt drawn toward the Omarion Nebula, which was once home to the Founders. (DS9: "The Search, Part II") However, it is possible that the desire to visit the nebula was "hardwired" into him. Changelings could sense, in most cases, the presence of other Changelings. (DS9: "The Search, Part I", "Homefront", "Chimera") The Jem'Hadar may also have the ability to sense Changelings, though this ability might not be telepathic but an imprinted response to a Changeling's gelatinous state, as a child Jem'Hadar who sensed Odo did not respond to him until he temporarily reverted to that state. (DS9: "The Abandoned") Further suggestion of a telepathic trait arose when Odo's remaining morphogenic enzymes were stimulated by a plasma field, creating a miniaturized "Great Link" with Benjamin Sisko, Jadzia Dax, and Elim Garak. (DS9: "Things Past")
At the very least, there exists a "hive mind" among the species when joined with the Great Link. (DS9: "The Search, Part II", "Broken Link", "Sacrifice of Angels", "Chimera") For instance, Odo once commented, "During the Link, I sensed that the other Changelings were trying to hide things from me... faces, names." (DS9: "Broken Link")
The Founders of the Dominion were Changelings and made up the majority of the Dominion's leadership. Changelings preferred to think of themselves as a drop (the individual) in the larger ocean (what they called the Great Link). A Changeling, therefore, typically had little sense of individual identity. Being a liquid-based lifeform, to link with other Changelings, they simply reverted to this state, and the liquid blended together, creating a link between them. (DS9: "The Search, Part II") Centuries before, the Founders had sent the Hundred Changelings throughout the galaxy as a way to gauge other species by the way they treated the weak and vulnerable. (DS9: "The Begotten") There were legends of Changelings having been on the planet Rakhar. (DS9: "Vortex")
It was suggested that Changelings were biologically immortal and therefore never died of old age (DS9: "Children of Time", "Behind the Lines") Laas was over 200 years old. (DS9: "Chimera") However, it was possible to kill Changelings by a number of means. Severe cases of radiation poisoning could prove fatal. (DS9: "The Adversary", "The Begotten") Changelings were also killed by phaser or disruptor fire, at sufficiently high settings. (DS9: "Crossover", "Apocalypse Rising") A Changeling was observed succumbing to trauma following the impact of a ship crashing into a planetary surface (a crash in which the ship's inertial dampers had failed). (DS9: "The Ship") The Admiral Leyton/Miles O'Brien Changeling laughingly remarked to Sisko that, including himself, there were only four Changeling agents in the Alpha Quadrant. (DS9: "Homefront", "Paradise Lost") Of the four three were dead:

The Krajensky Changeling in 2371 (DS9: "The Adversary")
The General Martok Changeling was killed by the Klingons in 2373 (DS9: "Apocalypse Rising")
The Dr. Julian Bashir Changeling was killed in the destruction of the USS Yukon in 2373 (DS9: "By Inferno's Light")
Changelings could assume the forms of both male and female humanoids. (DS9: "Tacking Into the Wind") The majority of Changelings appeared to favor either a male or female form, even when impersonating individual solids. (DS9: "The Search, Part I", "Heart of Stone", "The Adversary") It was unknown if this indicated a true biological gender or gender identity, or was simply a matter of personal preference. Changelings could experience feelings of physical attraction and love towards solids and were capable of sexual intercourse with them, and with each other while in humanoid form. However, a Changeling could not have children with a solid. (DS9: "Crossfire", "A Simple Investigation", "Favor the Bold", "Chimera")
Changelings began their lives in an "infant" state, as a small quantity of seemingly inanimate liquid. In this state, they were capable of limited shapeshifting, usually into simple geometric shapes, and responding to external stimuli such as moving away from an electrical charge. Over time they developed into maturity, increasing in mass and gaining greater understanding of their surroundings and control over their shapeshifting abilities, eventually becoming capable of verbal communication and assuming complex forms. (DS9: "The Alternate", "The Begotten") Dr. Bashir once jokingly suggested that Changelings may experience an equivalent to puberty or menopause (DS9: "Broken Link").
Despite the existence of infants, it was unknown how Changelings reproduced. Garak expressed doubt over whether or not Changelings have mothers. (DS9: "The Way of the Warrior") Changelings regarded all other members of their species as their "family", although it is unclear if this indicated a genetic relationship or merely a social one. (DS9: "The Search, Part II")
A Changeling could also be transformed by the Great Link into a solid permanently. (DS9: "Broken Link") Also, an infant Changeling once transformed the then-human Odo into a Changeling again by absorbing itself into his body, but it had also been dying at the time, so it is unknown how this would have normally affected the 'giver'. (DS9: "The Begotten")


=== Modified Changelings ===

During the Dominion War, Section 31 conducted secret experiments on Changeling prisoners of war on Daystrom Station. Termed Project Proteus, these torturous procedures were designed to create better infiltrators. One known chemical compound used in the experiments as a stabilizing agent was thelomium-847. One of the test subjects, later called Vadic, escaped and killed the lead scientist before freeing her fellow prisoners. Vadic discovered that they could transmit their new abilities to regular Changelings by linking with them. In the process, the modified Changelings also lost their orange liquid appearance for a reddish and more gelatinous natural form.
The altered Changelings were able to mimic the internal organs, fluids, and cellular biology of the solids without DNA, being able to pass the detection tests inherited from the Dominion War. Even after being killed, they kept their disguises, only returning to their natural state after being cut into small pieces.
Their modified biology, however, also made Vadic's followers vulnerable to the same weaknesses as the solid whose forms they mimicked, such as blades or even the coldness of space. Choosing to become modified also meant sacrificing their longevity for a much shortened life span, and to experience constant pain for the rest of their lives. They, or at least younger and inexperienced ones, still needed to return to their natural form after some time, or else their disguise would wobble from exhaustion. Also, contrary to regular Changelings, Betazoids could feel emotions from the modified individuals and sense that something wasn't right when approached by an impostor. (PIC: "Seventeen Seconds", "No Win Scenario", "Imposters", "Dominion", "Surrender")
As minute amounts of thelomium-847 remained within the experimented Changelings and were spread to any Changeling that chose to be modified, this could be used to track them using sensors.  (PIC: "Dominion")


== Culture ==
Changeling culture revolved around the Great Link and shapeshifting. While in the Link, a Changeling had little sense of time or its individual self and saw itself as a part of a larger whole. Changelings hated to be separated from their people and would seek out the company of other Changelings with whom they had personal conflicts rather than remain alone. (DS9: "Behind the Lines") Changelings considered linking with one another the ultimate form of intimacy, and many found spoken language and other expressions of intimacy such as sex limited. (DS9: "Favor the Bold") Being in the Link was described as "paradise" for a Changeling, and even Odo, who bitterly opposed the goals of the Founders dreamed of returning to it. (DS9: "The Die is Cast", "Sacrifice of Angels")
Most Changelings, including Odo, displayed a marked preference for order, efficiency, and following rules, which Odo interpreted through the lens of justice but other Changelings viewed through the lens of control. (DS9: "Necessary Evil", "The Search, Part II") Odo once commented to Worf that "My people have an innate need for order", suggesting the compulsion may be biological in origin. (DS9: "Crossfire")
Throughout their entire history, no Changeling had ever harmed another. (DS9: "Broken Link") Above all else, the Changelings wanted their people to all be united in the Great Link, and renegades such as Odo were given ample opportunities to return home with all transgressions forgiven. Weyoun 4 informed Odo that the Founders wanted him back after he first rejected them. (DS9: "To the Death") The Changeling who impersonated Colonel Lovok allowed Odo to leave the Battle of the Omarion Nebula unharmed, and the impostor Krajensky attempted to convince him to escape the self-destructing Defiant with it. (DS9: "The Die is Cast", "The Adversary") The Female Changeling prioritized returning Odo, who was previously banished, back to the Link over the outcome of the Dominion War. (DS9: "Favor the Bold")
Shapeshifting gave Changelings physical empathy with other lifeforms, allowing them to gain knowledge of them, though they spent most of their existence in the Great Link. (DS9: "The Search, Part II", "Chimera")
The modified Changeling faction led by Vadic was known to have abandoned the notion of not harming their own kind. Possibly regarding their goal of revenge against the Federation to ultimately be more important, they were willing to execute any member that spoke up against Vadic's decisions. (PIC: "The Bounty")


== History ==
See: Founder - History and Dominion history


== Legacy ==
In 2380, when Beckett Mariner was suspicious about Brad Boimler's relationship with Barbara Brinson, she included Changelings in her list of what Barbara might be. (LD: "Cupid's Errant Arrow")
In contrast, in the same year conspiracy theorist Steve Levy claimed that Changelings were not real, and that "the Dominion War didn't happen." (LD: "No Small Parts")
At some point between the end of the Dominion War and 2401, a group of Changelings, still bitter over losing the Dominion War, broke off from the Great Link to seek revenge. To that end, one Changeling took the form of a Human under the name Titus Rikka in 2401 and procured a quantum tunneling device from Daystrom Station, using it to destroy the Starfleet recruitment center in District Seven at M'talas Prime. (PIC: "The Next Generation"). Another Changeling infiltrated the USS Titan-A and replaced a member of the crew, Ensign Eli Foster. (PIC: "Seventeen Seconds") Vadic and her crew were defeated by the Titan-A and their ship, the Shrike, was destroyed. (PIC: "Surrender") It was subsequently revealed that Vadic's faction were working with the Borg, infiltrating the Federation to set up a Borg takeover as revenge for their defeat in the Dominion War. (PIC: "Võx") Following the destruction of the Borg, Admiral Beverly Crusher was able to devise a way to privately scan for irregularities, allowing Starfleet to detect Changeling infiltrators, and Vadic's cohorts were rounded up and arrested. As they were in constant need of information, the Changelings kept but did not kill many of their targets whom Starfleet was able to find and rescue, including Tuvok. (PIC: "The Last Generation")


== Mirror universe ==
In the mirror universe, the Bajoran wormhole remained undiscovered as of 2375. Therefore, Changelings and other species native to the Gamma Quadrant remained unknown to the peoples of the Alpha Quadrant. The only exception was Odo, who was killed on Terok Nor during a workers' revolt in 2370. (DS9: "Crossover")


== People ==
Named
Laas
Odo
Odo (mirror universe)
Titus Rikka
Vadic
Unnamed
List of unnamed changelings
Changeling who took Julian Bashir's form
Changeling who took Eli Foster's form
Changeling who took Krajensky's form
Changeling who took Leyton's form
Changeling who took Lovok's form
Changeling who took Martok's form
Changeling who took Miles O'Brien's form
Changeling who took William T. Riker's form
Changeling who took Tuvok's form