The Coridanites or Coridans were a spacefaring humanoid species from the dilithium-rich planet Coridan in the Alpha Quadrant. They have been members of the United Federation of Planets since 2268. (ENT: "Shadows of P'Jem"; DIS: "Magic to Make the Sanest Man Go Mad"; TOS: "Journey to Babel")


== History ==
The Coridanites traded with the Orions for centuries prior to 2155. (ENT: "Demons")
In 2151, Coridan had a population of three billion, with the majority living in several cities in the equatorial region. The capital city was surrounded by a shanty town, and there were almost as many bio-signs outside the city as there were within it. The planet was known for having the largest shipyards in its sector, building advanced warp-capable vessels, some of which were rumored to reach warp 7. However, the planet was also embroiled in an internal conflict between the government, backed by the Vulcan High Command, and rebel forces, secretly supported by the Andorian Empire. The Vulcan agenda was to keep the planet's chancellorship stable while the Tau Ceti Accords prohibited any Andorian presence on the planet, which in turn assured Coridan's dilithium exports to Vulcan. (ENT: "Shadows of P'Jem")

Chancellor Kalev invited Captain Jonathan Archer and T'Pol of the NX-class Enterprise to visit the planet, but they were captured by rebels and held for ransom. As a result, a commando force led by Sopek, the Vulcan senior officer of the sector, as well as the Andorian Imperial Guard, led by Shran, who was thereby violating the Tau Ceti Accords, came to assist the rescue. (ENT: "Shadows of P'Jem")
In 2152, Coridanites were represented at an Interspecies Medical Exchange conference on Dekendi III. At one point, the "Coridan Genome Conference" was rescheduled to 1400 hours and changed to auditorium six. This was announced on a speaker system inside the conference building. (ENT: "Stigma")
In 2155, Coridan took part in talks on Earth to form a Coalition of Planets. Here, the Coridanites rejected the Tellarite proposal of a trade embargo against the Orion Syndicate. The Coridan representative emphasized his people's long-standing trade relations with the Orions and claimed that the accusation of Orions attacking Tellarite freighters was slander. (ENT: "Demons")
The Babel Conference in 2268 was to consider whether to allow Coridans admission into the United Federation of Planets. Coridan was considered underpopulated at that time, making the planet susceptible to illegal mining operations, e.g., by the Orions. Federation membership would provide the planet with protection under interstellar law. (TOS: "Journey to Babel"; TAS: "The Pirates of Orion") Mining operations were maintained there by the Orions and Tellarites, among others, a concern that led some to think they should be denied Federation membership. Despite the Orion Syndicate making an initial attempt to sabotage the Babel Conference, Ambassador Sarek of Vulcan spoke in favor of admittance, and was given credit for passage of the measure. Coridan joined the Federation that same year. (TOS: "Journey to Babel"; TNG: "Sarek")
In 2374, during the Dominion War, Coridan's dilithium mines were attacked by the Jem'Hadar, as they made the planet a strategically important target. (DS9: "One Little Ship")
In 3189, after the Federation largely collapsed following the Burn, a mining colony of about fifty Coridanites existed on "the Colony". (DIS: "Far From Home")


== Biology ==

Most Coridanites were humanoids with facial patterns that formed the impression of large scales. A few were bald and had much more extensive scalation. They had blue blood. (ENT: "Shadows of P'Jem", "Demons", DIS: "Far From Home")


== Individuals ==
Named
Kal
Kalev
Os'ir
Magustav Pachangara
Traeg
Unnamed
Unnamed Coridanites