The Deltans were a humanoid species originating from the Federation planet Delta IV, which was located in the Alpha Quadrant.


== Biology ==
Externally, Deltans were physically indistinguishable from Humans but were identified by their bald scalps and were known to wear head dresses. Their strong sexual attraction could be a distraction for members of other species, which is why Deltans swore an oath of celibacy upon entering service in Starfleet. (ENT: "Bound"; Star Trek: The Motion Picture; Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home)
While Deltans had pain-relieving abilities that manifested during tactile contact, this ability did not heal injuries. (Star Trek: The Motion Picture - The Director's Edition)


== History ==
In 2141, the ECS Horizon encountered a group of Deltans. Travis Mayweather, who was fifteen at the time, later described them as very attractive and very open. On the advice and invitation of his father, he dealt with the feelings they engendered in him by performing exhausting workouts in the gym, a method he returned to (and recommended to Lieutenant Malcolm Reed) while three Orion slave girls were "guests" aboard Enterprise in December 2154. (ENT: "Bound")
One Deltan serving aboard USS Enterprise, Starfleet Lieutenant Ilia, made direct contact with the V'ger entity when it approached Earth in the 2270s, whereupon she was listed as missing in action. (Star Trek: The Motion Picture) Another Deltan served as an officer aboard the USS Excelsior in 2285. (Star Trek III: The Search for Spock) Four male Deltan ambassadors later served on the Federation Council in 2286. (Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home) Six Deltan ambassadors were later present at the Khitomer Conference in 2293. (Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country)
In the mirror universe, Deltans were one of the subject races of the Terran Empire. In the early 24th century, the Deltan Dada Noe worked as an administrator of a weapons facility on Terra. (Star Trek: Section 31)

In 2364, an illustration of a Deltan appeared when Data was reviewing all literature on the Dixon Hill series of novels in the USS Enterprise-D database. (TNG: "The Big Goodbye")

In 2401, Doctors Soji Asha and Agnes Jurati visited the Deltans on Raritan IV as part of a goodwill tour on behalf of synthetics. (PIC: "The Star Gazer")


== Society and culture ==
After a Deltan had sex for the first time, customarily they doused themselves with bowls of cleansing milk, then their extended family would dance around the couple with tambourine-like instruments. Finally, the couple would be draped in the robes of ancient star mariners, and sing an ancient mariner duet called "Fruitful Coupling". (SA: "Come, Let's Away")


== Individuals ==
Named

Ilia
Melle
Dada Noe
Dada Noe (mirror)
T'Veen (half-Vulcan hybrid)
Unnamed

Unnamed Deltans