The Denobulans were a humanoid species from the planet Denobula, which was located in the Beta Quadrant.


== Society and culture ==
As of the mid-2150s, the number of Denobulan inhabitants on their homeworld totaled twelve billion, all of whom shared one continent. (ENT: "The Catwalk") Consequently, living space was at a premium, and Denobulan culture had come to embrace close, communal lifestyles, though this habitation arrangement was due to choice, rather than necessity. (ENT: "Doctor's Orders")

Though typically embracing a full range of emotions, Denobulans seemed to highly value optimism and cheerfulness. However, they could also be deceitful, and their temper was sometimes furious. (ENT: "Broken Bow", "Stigma", et al.) Denobulans were renowned for having an abundance of patience. This extreme patience could reflect on their marital interactions, so that they were quite content to spend a considerable length of time apart. (ENT: "Stigma")
Denobulans did not have conversations with each other while eating together, as they considered it a waste of time. (ENT: "Fight or Flight") Denobulans generally ate meat, including Denobulan sausage. (ENT: "A Night In Sickbay", "The Seventh")
The native Denobulans did not keep pets, but invested effort in hunting Denobulan lemurs, as their kidneys were considered a Denobulan delicacy. (ENT: "A Night In Sickbay")
Denobulans considered hallucination healthy, as it was seen as a harmless way to release nervous energy. (ENT: "Exile", "Doctor's Orders")
The Denobulan lullaby was a form of song. In 2154, Phlox offered to sing one of these lullabies to Porthos, although the doctor remembered that his singing had often made his Denobulan children cry. (ENT: "Storm Front")
Denobulan medical ethics considered a patient's will to be absolutely binding, including his refusal to be cured or live. This was much unlike the Hippocratic Oath followed by Humans, which compelled a physician to save a patient. (ENT: "The Breach", "Bounty") By the 22nd century, the Denobulans had experimented with nanotechnology. (ENT: "Regeneration")
The Denobulans who resided on their homeworld included neurosurgeons and quantum theorists of varying qualities. (ENT: "Twilight") The Denobulans held in high regard a particular doctor among their species, Phlox, who gained recognition for his fine motor skills. (ENT: "The Crossing")
On Denobula, dermal art was very common until sometime before 2153. (ENT: "Stratagem")


=== Relationships and family ===
As Phlox once admitted, family relations on Denobula could be extremely complicated. (ENT: "Terra Prime") Unlike Klingons, Denobulans didn't group themselves into Houses. (ENT: "Divergence") They typically preferred to be among large groups and found solitude uncomfortable. However, Denobulans - at least male Denobulans - were uncomfortable being touched by persons they were not intimate with. Denobulans were typically polyamorous, where a man typically had three wives, who each had three husbands. This created extremely large extended families.
In addition, Denobulan marriages were not exclusive, and married Denobulans could be intimate with anyone they chose. The females emitted powerful pheromones during their mating season. Male Denobulans often became combative during this time, and mating could require medical supervision. (ENT: "Dear Doctor", "A Night In Sickbay") Denobulan males were more inhibited than Denobulan women, and often found the idea of disrobing in front of others uncomfortable. (ENT: "Bounty") A typical romantic overture for a female Denobulan to give would be to offer their prospective mate a rose petal bath. (ENT: "Stigma") Doctor Jeremy Lucas once observed that, given the comparatively elaborate complexities of the Denobulans' mating cycle, they made Humans seem "like single-cell organisms." (ENT: "Dear Doctor") In Phlox's opinion, however, "Any man would be a fool to ignore the romantic overtures of a healthy Denobulan woman." (ENT: "Stigma") He also highly valued the complexity of Denobulan mating practices, being of the opinion that two people were insufficient for a "proper" Denobulan marriage, though a Denobulan woman could feasibly marry only a single Denobulan man. (ENT: "Divergence", "Doctor's Orders", "Stigma") A Denobulan woman who had only a single Denobulan husband could take his name as her surname. (ENT: "Stigma")

A traditional greeting for Denobulan lovers began with approaching each other face-to-face, so that each individual was not quite touching the other. The Denobulans then smelled the other's scent and finally parted. (ENT: "Stigma")

Denobulans took delight in bequeathing their belongings to far-flung relatives. (ENT: "Zero Hour")


== Physiology ==

Anatomically, Denobulans were considerably more complex than Humans. Denobulans had prominent facial ridges running down either side of the forehead to the cheeks, an enlarged brow ridge under a high receding hairline, a vertical crevice in the center of the forehead, and a ridged chin. (ENT: "Broken Bow", et al.) They had ridges on their back along the spine. (ENT: "Doctor's Orders") Their toenails were dark brown and yellow striped. (ENT: "A Night In Sickbay", "Doctor's Orders") Denobulans had to trim their toenails at least once a week, due to the nails' extremely rapid growth rate. Denobulans also had very long tongues, and they used tongue scrapers. (ENT: "A Night In Sickbay")

Denobulan males had a line of hair down the middle of their chest, up to their neck. Similar brown streaks could be found running down the spine ridges on the back, as well as on the feet and on the back of both arms. (ENT: "Bounty", "A Night In Sickbay") The skin was much like that of Humans and Xindi-Primates. (ENT: "The Xindi")

Denobulan females had very potent pheromones that the males could sense, and they released them when they were romantically interested in someone, and presumably during their mating season. Denobulan males were known to become violent during the mating season. (ENT: "Dear Doctor") Anatomically, Denobulan males were also sexually compatible with both Vulcan and Human females. (ENT: "Bounty", "E²")

Denobulans had a unique ability to enlarge their faces. This was an instinct for when they felt threatened. (ENT: "Home") They could also display an unusually wide smile for humanoids. (ENT: "Broken Bow", "A Night In Sickbay", "Stigma", "These Are The Voyages...")

Denobulans normally required very little sleep, but they did hibernate for a sleep cycle of five to six days each year, although two days were sufficient as a bare minimum. If a Denobulan was nearing a sleep cycle, they might experience bouts of dizziness as a consequence. Deep hibernation resulted in the sleeping Denobulan becoming unresponsive to noises, regardless of how loud they were, but they could be awakened via a particular drug delivered intravenously. If a Denobulan was awakened prematurely, the results could be somewhat unpredictable; hibernating Denobulans, if woken, appeared extremely disoriented and confused, with oddly pitched voices, and had difficulty maintaining normal motor skills and cognitive functions. (ENT: "Dear Doctor", "Two Days and Two Nights", "Similitude", "Bound")
A Denobulan's sleep cycle could be affected by a type of pheromone emitted by Orion slave girls, making the Denobulan's body react as if their annual sleep cycle was imminent. This could affect a Denobulan to such an extent that the person required stimulants to keep awake. The longer the Denobulan was exposed to the pheromones, the more pronounced the reactions became. (ENT: "Bound")
Denobulans had highly efficient natural climbing abilities similar to those of Earth lizards, being capable of scaling vertical rock faces at a rapid speed with no equipment whatsoever. In this manner, a Denobulan could appear to scuttle up a rock face without needing to find handholds. (ENT: "The Breach")
Denobulans appeared to possess particularly powerful immune systems; when Phlox was nearly assimilated by the Borg, his immune system was able to fight off the nanoprobes long enough for him to find a means of destroying them, although he admitted that his immune system would not be able to hold them off indefinitely. (ENT: "Regeneration")
Denobulan life spans were extremely long, though a Denobulan elder did not necessarily look particularly old. (ENT: "A Night In Sickbay") Phlox, in the 22nd century, once stated that his grandmother lived through the last of numerous wars Denobula fought with the Antarans, a conflict which ended while Earth was in the 19th century. This indicates that at least three generations of Denobulans had existed during the three-hundred-year span between the events. (ENT: "The Breach")

The Denobulans on their homeworld practiced genetic engineering, with generally positive results. (ENT: "Borderland")
Denobulan neurophysiology was about as resilient as that of Humans but less so than that of Vulcans. Thus, disruptions throughout a Denobulan's neocortex would probably be lethal, though a Vulcan could withstand such disruptions, merely being rendered unconscious. As a result, a Denobulan, like a Human, could probably be killed by Rajiin's telepathically caused disruptions throughout their neocortex, which was not necessarily fatal for a Vulcan. (ENT: "Rajiin")
Denobulan physiology was incompatible with wisps. No matter how much one such entity tried to invade a Denobulan's mind, it could not do so. Attempting such a procedure left no lasting effect on the Denobulan's physiology. (ENT: "The Crossing") On the other hand, Denobulans could be inhabited by Organians and were susceptible to having their memories altered, so that they retained no memory of the incident afterwards. Although one particular Organian once reckoned that Denobulan technology had enabled Doctor Phlox to detect that a pair of Organians were inhabiting two Humans, no such technology had been used in that case. (ENT: "Observer Effect")
In common with such species as Humans, Vulcans, and Ferengi, Denobulans could be drugged and rendered unconscious by anesthesia gas, such as when emitted from Ferengi gas canisters. (ENT: "Acquisition") Similarly, two Denobulan males who became overly aggressive with each other during the mating season could be separated using a dose of niaxilin. (ENT: "Dear Doctor") Another method of rendering Denobulans unconscious was a Vulcan nerve pinch. (ENT: "Singularity") A neural toxin delivered intravenously would terminate the Denobulan's synaptic functions within seconds. (ENT: "Regeneration")
Some indications suggest that Denobulans were particularly susceptible to certain types of radiation. When exposure to an exotic form of radiation caused almost the entire crew of the NX-class Enterprise to exhibit irrational and obsessive behavior, Phlox was the only senior officer whose actions nearly led to the deliberate death of another of his crewmates, as he was adamant about using surgical methods to discover why Ensign Travis Mayweather was suffering from a headache. (ENT: "Singularity") Furthermore, subjecting a Denobulan to a rather excessive dose of omicron radiation could be excruciatingly painful for the Denobulan. (ENT: "Regeneration")

Whereas trans-dimensional disturbances ordinarily caused disruptions in the Human neocortex, Denobulans were highly resilient to their effects; however, they were not entirely immune and could still suffer some minor effects like headaches and, through prolonged exposure, hallucinations. They were also immune to the epidermal decay caused by the transdimensional disturbances, which affected not only Humans but also Vulcans. (ENT: "Doctor's Orders")
Denobulans could operate without food for considerably long durations. Eating not only enabled them to keep up their strength but also accelerated their cellular metabolism. (ENT: "Regeneration") A Denobulan could lose body weight by ingesting a Danaxian tapeworm. (ENT: "The Council")

The Denobulan doctor Phlox once claimed that the Denobulans were severely afflicted by thymic sclerosis and that it was "found in all strata of Denobulan society." This, however, was a deceit. (ENT: "Stigma")


== History ==
The Denobulans believed they were the only intelligent species in the galaxy until the B'Saari made first contact with them. This incident thus came as quite a surprise to the Denobulans, many of whom took a while to accept the truth that they were not alone in the galaxy. Though it was a somewhat difficult process, the Denobulans were eventually forced to reevaluate their thinking. (ENT: "Future Tense")

Denobulans fought several wars against the Antaran species, the last of which occurred during the late 19th century. The Denobulans demonized the enemy, and their battle tactics killed twenty million Antarans. Both sides made faceless enemies of each other, and, although most had outgrown the past hatred, some Denobulans still held a grudge against Antarans as of the 2150s. (ENT: "The Breach")
A few hundred years before the mid-22nd century, the Denobulans had a form of entertainment that was similar to movies. When they discovered their real lives were more interesting, the Denobulans abandoned this type of media, having found it had lost its appeal. (ENT: "Dear Doctor")
The Denobulan use of genetic engineering, yielding results which were generally positive, began in or before the mid-20th century, and proceeded from then on. (ENT: "Borderland") The Denobulans who resided on their homeworld never came close to using genetic engineering to destroy one another. Possible reasons for this were multiple, ranging from the Denobulans being simply fortunate to the possibility that, by the time they started using genetic engineering, their instincts were synchronized with their intellect. (ENT: "Cold Station 12")
In 2115 or soon thereafter, a medical emergency occurred in orbit around Denobula when there was an explosion aboard a cargo ship which claimed more than 17 victims. Various medical teams helped to deal with the aftermath. (ENT: "Fight or Flight", "Damage") Also during the early 22nd century, the Denobulan Infantry was deployed in at least one conflict. (ENT: "Cease Fire")

Denobulans had contact with Humans as of the 2130s. By that time, they were cooperating within the Interspecies Medical Exchange (IME) and jointly operated Cold Station 12, although the Denobulans maintained a medical database of their own at least until 2154. (ENT: "Cold Station 12", "Observer Effect", "Demons")

In 2151, Denobulan doctor and IME member Phlox, who had until then been stationed in San Francisco on Earth, was assigned to be the chief medical officer of Humanity's first warp five starship, Enterprise NX-01. (ENT: "Broken Bow") In 2153 there were no Denobulans in the city of Atlanta. (ENT: "The Xindi") As of November 2154, there was a Denobulan ambassador assigned to Earth. (ENT: "Affliction")

In 2155, a Denobulan ambassador participated in talks in San Francisco on forming a Coalition of Planets. (ENT: "Demons") In a historic holoprogram set in 2161, Phlox and his three wives were referenced as attending the Federation Founding Ceremony. (ENT: "These Are The Voyages...")

By the 2260s and into the 24th century, Denobulans served in Starfleet, and Denobulan civilian scientists operated in Federation space. (SNW: "Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow", PRO: "Asylum", LD: "Mugato, Gumato")
At some point in the 24th century, the Denobulans discovered the existence of the Halem'nite, a pre-warp, pre-industrial civilization on the planet Halem'no which was along the Denobulan trade routes. Halem'no experienced increasingly severe dust storms that threatened the very existence of the Halem'nites, a species whose care for each other and planetary situation reminded the Denobulans a lot of themselves. Possibly feeling a connection with the Halem'nites, the Denobulans set up five weather modification towers designed by Doctor Hitoroshi Kreel on the planet, disguising them as the mountains in order to avoid breaking the Prime Directive. The Halem'nites came to believe that gods had given them the towers to ensure their survival, building a whole religion around it. (DIS: "Whistlespeak")
Following the discovery of the Progenitors in 2369, Doctor Kreel was one of the scientists sent by the Federation to investigate and who later hid the technology that was found. (DIS: "Whistlespeak")
By the 32nd century, the Denobulan weather towers on Halem'no were failing due to a lack of maintenance, resulting in four out of the five falling along with the Halem'nite settlements that they were protecting. In 3191, following a clue to the location of the Progenitors' technology, the USS Discovery tied Halem'no to the Denobulans and repaired the last weather tower before it could fail completely. Breaking the Prime Directive, Captain Michael Burnham chose to tell the Halem'nites about what the Denobulans had done for them and to teach them how to properly maintain the Denobulan technology that was keeping the only inhabitable part of their planet safe. (DIS: "Whistlespeak")
By that same year, the Denobulans had joined the Federation. (DIS: "Lagrange Point")


=== Alternate realities and timelines ===
In an alternate timeline wherein Jonathan Archer was infected by interspatial parasites, some of the greatest neurosurgeons and quantum theorists on Denobula were consulted by Phlox in an attempt to find a treatment. They believed it was impossible to eliminate the parasites without also killing Archer, and correctly assured Phlox that the technology to eradicate the infestation did not exist. The parasites were eventually destroyed due to a suicidal sacrifice by Archer, bringing an end to the alternate timeline. (ENT: "Twilight")
In another alternate timeline where Enterprise was thrown back to 2037, Phlox had many part-Denobulan descendants that went on to serve aboard Enterprise. (ENT: "E²")

In the mirror universe, Denobulans were a slave race of the Terran Empire. A manifestation of the Denobulans' political alignment with the Empire was that the Denobulan Phlox served aboard the ISS Enterprise (NX-01) as the ship's doctor. The Denobulans were not part of a rebellion which opposed the Empire, as it was not in their nature to rebel. In 2155, the fact that the Denobulans of the prime universe were considered equal to the Humans and Vulcans was learned by residents of the mirror universe, including T'Pol and Phlox. Although they helped the rebels sabotage the commandeered USS Defiant during Jonathan Archer's attempt to overthrow the Emperor, Phlox did so in the hopes that the Emperor would reward him with concubines. (ENT: "In A Mirror, Darkly, Part II")
In 2255, Captain Michael Burnham had the knowledge that the Denobulans were planning to join the Coalition plotting to overthrow the Terran Empire. (DIS: "Terra Firma, Part 1", "Terra Firma, Part 2")


== People ==
Named
List of named Denobulans
Unnamed
List of unnamed Denobulans


== Related topics ==
Denobulan-Antaran wars
Denobulan Infantry
Denobulan language
Denobulan lemur
Denobulan lullaby
Denobulan medical database
Denobulan medical ship
Denobulan sausage
Denobulan Science Academy
Denobulan shuttle