The Devore were a spacefaring humanoid species native to a planet in the Delta Quadrant. They were characterized by thin serrated ridges on their eyebrows and a small forehead protrusion. Their government was the Devore Imperium, which controlled eleven star systems across three sectors as of 2376. This was an authoritarian regime known for its extreme persecution of telepaths. (VOY: "Counterpoint", "Dragon's Teeth") 


== History ==

In 2375, USS Voyager spent several weeks traversing the territory of the Devore Imperium. Their journey was complicated by the presence of telepaths aboard: Tuvok and Vorik, along with twelve Brenari refugees rescued from a stricken freighter. To conceal them from Devore inspection teams, they were held in transporter suspension in cargo bay 1. The plan was to deliver the refugees to a transport vessel that would ferry them to a wormhole leading out of Devore space.
Unexpectedly, Devore Inspector Kashyk arrived on Voyager claiming he wanted to defect. He warned Captain Kathryn Janeway that the transport vessel was actually a trap, and that they needed to find the wormhole themselves. With his assistance, Voyager evaded Devore patrols and obtained scientific data from Doctor Torat allowing them to predict the next appearance of the wormhole, or more precisely intermittent cyclical vortex, in the Tehara system.
At the critical juncture, Kashyk revealed that his true intent was to destroy the wormhole enabling telepaths to escape Devore space. Janeway, in turn, revealed that she had never trusted him and had misled him about the wormhole's location, which at that moment was being used by the telepaths to flee to safety. Unwilling to report his failure to his superiors, Kashyk allowed Voyager to proceed unmolested. (VOY: "Counterpoint")
Later that year, Commander Chakotay listed the Devore as a foe who might have cause to hire Hazari bounty hunters to capture Voyager. (VOY: "Think Tank")
A Devore planet in Grid 315 was once home to a Vaadwaur colony. When Gedrin inquired in 2376 whether the Devore would be willing to negotiate for "a continent or two" with Vaadwaur survivors, he was told by Seven of Nine that the Devore were intolerant of outsiders. (VOY: "Dragon's Teeth")
In 3190, Haz Mazaro told Cleveland Booker that he was offering a special on Devore scanners and modified scan deflectors. (DIS: "All In")


== Society and culture ==
The Devore were a militaristic and xenophobic people largely avoided by other races. All outsiders were labeled gaharey, meaning "strangers", and subjected to meticulous inspections while within Devore space. Devore Imperative 32, Codicil 626 specified: "All Gaharay vehicles that deviate from prescribed flight vectors will be impounded, their crews detained and relocated."
The Devore harbored a particular prejudice against telepaths, who they believed were incapable of trust due to their ability to read minds. To harbor a telepath was a violation of Imperative 12, Codicil 6, otherwise known as the "cardinal protocol", and grounds for immediate arrest. Telepaths and those who aided them were sent to detention centers; the Devore were believed to have incarcerated thousands of innocent people. Devore soldiers underwent years of mental training to prevent their minds from being read telepathically. Though rare, Devore who sympathized with telepaths were not unheard of.
A regional astronomical phenomenon appreciated by the Devore were the kolyan kolyar, meaning "infinite spirals". (VOY: "Counterpoint")


== Technology ==

The Devore Imperium operated warships that were a match for the Federation Intrepid-class starship, as well as small warp-capable scout ships. Their vessels were equipped with transporters and refractive shielding that concealed them from long-range sensors. They also monitored their space with automated sensor arrays. (VOY: "Counterpoint")


== Individuals ==
Named
Kashyk
Prax
Unnamed
Unnamed Devore