The Dilmerians were a pre-warp humanoid species native to Dilmer III.


== History ==
In 2382, the USS Cerritos dispatched an away team, consisting of Lieutenants jg Beckett Mariner, D'Vana Tendi, and T'Lyn, to Delmer III to eliminate technology left behind by an USS Enterprise-D from an alternate universe. They discovered a crashed shuttlecraft and the still-functional head of an alternate universe Lieutenant Commander Data.
Due to a transporter mishap on the Cerritos and the temporal differential on Dilmer III, the team found themselves stranded on the planet for a year. The trio occupied an abandoned house and became familiar with the nearby town, while dodging the suspicions of the local lurker Snell. T'Lyn was able to earn money by selling giant produce and hair tonic at the market.
After T'Lyn finally received a retrieval signal from the Cerritos, she and Tendi were briefly waylaid by Snell, who had witnessed Tendi speaking to Data. Gathering an angry mob to deal with the "witches", Snell was discredited when the head he thought Tendi carried was revealed to be a giant grape with a face drawn on, Data's head having been earlier concealed by T'Lyn. The Prime Directive thus preserved, the trio were subsequently beamed back to the Cerritos. (LD: "Fully Dilated")


== Biology ==
Dilmerians were distinguished by a pair of blunt horns on their foreheads. The color of their skin ranged from orange to yellow, and their hair from green to blue. (LD: "Fully Dilated")


== Society and culture ==

As of the 2380s, the Dilmerians had a pre-industrial level of technology. Their structures were constructed from brick and wood, and had gas lighting and indoor plumbing. They utilized carts and wagons, pulled either by hand or by horned horse-like draft animals. The Dilmerians grew many types of fruits and vegetables, and produced alcoholic beverages. Their economy was based on currency called globbers.
Poking another Dilmerian with one's horns (i.e. "horning") was considered assault; hurting someone's eye was grounds for two months' imprisonment.
The Dilmerians held a number of paranormal beliefs, including in witchcraft, demons, and the undead. Dilmerian settlements maintained an eternal flame to ward off dark spirits, and dousing the flame was also cause for imprisonment. (LD: "Fully Dilated")


== Individuals ==
Named
Snell
Unnamed
Unnamed Dilmerians