El-Aurians were a spacefaring humanoid species from the Delta Quadrant. Originating from the El-Aurian system, they were a long-lived race of "listeners" who possessed perceptive abilities that extended beyond the normal space-time continuum.


== History ==
The El-Aurians were a widely traveled people who spread themselves across many parts of the galaxy and beyond. At least one El-Aurian, Guinan, visited Earth in 1893, before Humans had any common knowledge of alien species. (TNG: "Time's Arrow", "Time's Arrow, Part II") Another region which the El-Aurians visited was near System J-25. (TNG: "Q Who")

In the distant past, the El-Aurians engaged in a long cold war with the Q Continuum, which was ended with a truce struck over a bottle of liquor. The moment of the truce was captured within the bottle, which could subsequently be used to summon a Q. The bottle was in Guinan's possession as of 2024. (PIC: "Monsters")
Around 2265, when Guinan wasn't present, this species was the victim of a major attack by the Borg, with all but a handful of El-Aurians being assimilated or killed and all El-Aurian cities being destroyed. (TNG: "Q Who", "Ensign Ro", "I Borg") The El-Aurian fatalities numbered in the millions, which included Tolian Soran's wife and children, and the loss of their homeworld scattered the survivors throughout the universe. (TNG: "Q Who", "The Best of Both Worlds", Star Trek Generations) On the other hand, by resisting when the Borg came to assimilate them, the El-Aurians defied their attackers' motto that "resistance is futile." (TNG: "I Borg")

In 2293, a group of 415 El-Aurian refugees were traveling to Earth, following their escape from the Borg, transported on two ships, the SS Lakul and the SS Robert Fox, when they were caught in the Nexus energy ribbon near the Sol system. None of the El-Aurians wanted to leave the Nexus, despite it endangering and eventually destroying their transport ships. The USS Enterprise-B was able to rescue 47 of the refugees, including Guinan and Dr. Soran. The survivors were in a state of panicked confusion and had at least some minor injuries. In the Enterprise's sickbay, they were given medical assistance and assured that everything would be alright by Pavel Chekov and a group of journalists who served as a makeshift medical team (although the mission cost the life of James T. Kirk, or so it was thought). (Star Trek Generations)

By 2368, there were still very few El-Aurians left, due to the Borg, and those who were still alive remained scattered throughout the galaxy, with no collective home any more. (TNG: "I Borg") While Guinan became the bartender aboard the USS Enterprise-D in 2365, Soran, following the Enterprise-B rescue, dedicated the next seventy-eight years (until his apparent death in 2371) to finding a way to return to the Nexus. (Star Trek Generations; TNG: "The Child") Martus Mazur, another El-Aurian refugee, visited Deep Space 9 in 2370. (DS9: "Rivals")
By 2382, Commander Kassia Nox was an El-Aurian serving in Starfleet as the commanding officer of Starbase 80 as well as its diplomatic liason. However, unlike Guinan, Nox was only in her 30s, rather than being centuries old, a fact which made her less enigmatic in the eyes of others. (LD: "Starbase 80?!")


== Biology ==

Externally, the El-Aurians were physically identical to Humans, in structure and even the range of racial phenotypes. (TNG: "The Child"; Star Trek Generations, et al.) El-Aurians had rybo-viroxic-nucleic sequences in their genes (similar to other humanoids, including Humans and Bajorans). (TNG: "Rascals")

A significant physical difference between Humans and El-Aurians was in the aging process, as the extremely long El-Aurian life span covered many centuries. One particular El-Aurian male was known to be a father of an adult when he was around two hundred years old in the 19th century, and to be in virtually perfect health at the age of around seven hundred years old as of the 24th century. This longevity also afforded them the opportunity to have many children. (TNG: "Time's Arrow", "Rascals", "Evolution") However, despite this longevity, El-Aurians reached adulthood at about the same rate as other humanoids. (LD: "Starbase 80?!") According to Guinan, El-Aurians only age when they choose to. (PIC: "The Star Gazer")
A Devidian temporal vortex suddenly being opened could potentially injure an El-Aurian more than it could a Human, knocking the El-Aurian unconscious and wounding them in such a way that the El-Aurian couldn't walk thereafter unless they received medical treatment. (TNG: "Time's Arrow, Part II") El-Aurians might also suffer from more common physical sensations, such as thirst and tennis elbow. (TNG: "Time's Arrow, Part II", "Suspicions")
El-Aurians were empathic, and also possessed a limited form of telepathy whereby they could, with difficulty, project an image of themselves into the mind of another person. (PIC: "Mercy")
El-Aurians had an awareness that superseded the normal flow of time and space, allowing them to be extraordinarily sensitive to the space-time continuum itself. (TNG: "Yesterday's Enterprise") Guinan was able to perceive the change from the regular timeline to the aforementioned alternate one and back again, switches that occurred in 2366, due to a disruption in the history of the starship USS Enterprise-C; the changes were felt by both the Guinan of the alternate timeline and that of the regular timeline. (TNG: "Yesterday's Enterprise", "Redemption II") After Data postulated his theory about El-Aurians being able to intuitively detect such alterations, the Jean-Luc Picard of that timeline admitted there were many things about El-Aurians which they couldn't easily explain. However, the faith he had in Guinan's "special wisdom", as he called it, was instrumental in resetting the timeline. (TNG: "Yesterday's Enterprise")
El-Aurians could be physically affected by changes in the timeline, with symptoms ranging from general feelings of unease to severe nausea and vomiting. These physiological effects were called Af-Kelt, or "time sickness". (PIC: "Watcher")


== Culture ==
El-Aurians described themselves as a race of "listeners", by which they meant that they could "hear" the world like music. To them, every action and word vibrated with a specific resonance, and they could further manipulate reality by finding and plucking the "right chord". (PIC: "Monsters")
Some El-Aurians used their abilities to help others, acting as advisers or confidants. A few turned their talent to more dubious pursuits, becoming con artists and tricksters, such as Martus Mazur, while Dr. Soran used his abilities to help bring his genocidal plan to re-enter the Nexus to fruition. (DS9: "Rivals"; Star Trek Generations) El-Aurians usually didn't experience difficulties with parents relating to their children, as El-Aurian children were usually good at listening to their parents. (TNG: "Evolution")
The El-Aurians believed that they were united by food and drink. Using their abilities, they could capture the half-life of a moment in time within physical objects. (PIC: "Monsters")


== People ==
Named
Guinan
Leandra
Martus Mazur
Kassia Nox
Tolian Soran
Terkim
Unnamed
Unnamed El-Aurians