The Ferengi were a warp-capable humanoid species from the planet Ferenginar. Ferengi civilization was built on free enterprise, where earning profit was the sole meaningful goal in life, superseding all other endeavors. To the Borg, they were known as Species 180. Despite their misogynistic views, small stature, lack of shame, and extreme obsession with profit, the Ferengi are one of the most underestimated species in all of the Alpha Quadrant. They are usually brilliant, can possess great cunning, and can sometimes hide that fact very convincingly. They can also possess a great aptitude for economics, sciences, and engineering, and they are among the best negotiators in the galaxy in regards to earning profits and deals without resorting to armed conflict.


== Biology ==

On average, Ferengi were shorter than Humans. Externally, they had orange-brown colored skin, blue fingernails and long blue toenails, enlarged skulls, wrinkled noses, and sharp teeth.
Internally, they had ascending ribs and upper and lower lungs, as well as an unusual four-lobed brain that could not be read by telepathic species such as Betazoids, although Counselor Deanna Troi was able to detect "deception" and "danger" from the Ferengi Bok. (DS9: "Bar Association", "The Dogs of War"; TNG: "The Battle", "The Price", "The Last Outpost") Ferengi physiology was similar to that of the Dopterians, of which they were distant relatives. (DS9: "The Forsaken")

The Ferengi's most distinguishing features were their large outer ears (called "lobes"), which gave them extremely acute hearing, sensitive enough to tell a person's species and gender, even through electronic distortion (DS9: "The Darkness and the Light"), atmospheric/altitude changes (DS9: "Starship Down"), and the decibel level of a sound. (DS9: "The Way of the Warrior") The lobes of the Ferengi male were larger than those of females. The sensitivity of the ears, while providing great sensual pleasure, also made them vulnerable to pain and other problems, including severe infections of the tympanic membrane which, if left untreated, could become fatal. (DS9: "Bar Association").

Ferengi lobes were usually directly connected to their brow-lines, although ears unconnected to the brow-lines were common by the 32nd century. (DIS: "Anomaly (DIS)")

The term lobeling was used to refer to a young Ferengi. (DS9: "Profit and Lace") In fact, according to Nog, "On Ferenginar, we learn about the Continuum while we still have our first set of ears." (DS9: "Treachery, Faith and the Great River")

Ferengi lobes were also said to tingle whenever the Ferengi sensed an opportunity for profit (DS9: "Progress") or was sexually aroused (DS9: "The Homecoming").

Most Ferengi were completely hairless. However, elderly Ferengi could have hair growing out of their ears (DS9: "The Nagus"), and some others could grow short stubble on their faces. (PIC: "Disengage")
Ferengi blood pressure was much higher than that of Humans. When Nog, Rom, and Quark were sent back to 1947 and analyzed by Human doctors, one of the medics commented on Quark's blood pressure, "250/167. If you were Human, I'd say you were due for a heart attack." Ferengi biochemistry differed sufficiently from that of Humans that sodium pentathol was ineffective as a truth serum. (DS9: "Little Green Men") Ferengi blood was yellow in color (LD: "Mugato, Gumato", "Parth Ferengi's Heart Place"; PIC: "Disengage"), and contained cells called pyrocytes. (TNG: "The Perfect Mate")

Otherwise, the Ferengi appeared to have a rather strong immune system. Quark was one of the very few members of the station's crew unaffected by the aphasia virus that struck Deep Space 9 in 2369. (DS9: "Babel")
Ferengi were known to have life spans that could exceed one hundred years. Following a cosmetic procedure performed on Vulcan, Ishka commented that her lobes hadn't felt so firm in a century. (DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi")

When startled, frightened, or in pain, Ferengi often emitted a high-pitched scream. (DS9: "Little Green Men", "The Siege of AR-558", "The Circle") They could also do this scream on purpose, such as when Quark was pretending to be injured. (DS9: "Invasive Procedures") Some Ferengi demonstrated a hissing reaction when threatened or in distress, not unlike an Earth cat. (DS9: "Sanctuary", "The Jem'Hadar")
A Ferengi diet mostly consisted of insects and other invertebrates like crabs or slugs. (DS9: "Ferengi Love Songs", "Rules of Acquisition", "The Assignment", "Tacking Into the Wind") They also ate fish. (TNG: "Unification II") Likewise, Nog's favorite Earth food was said to be squid. (DS9: "Blaze of Glory") While visiting a planet in the Gamma Quadrant in 2370, Quark complained about the native bugs, describing them being in his food as "disgusting." When Benjamin Sisko recalled "I thought Ferengi liked eating bugs," Quark was quick to note "Only certain bugs. Ferengi bugs." (DS9: "The Jem'Hadar")


== Society and culture ==


=== Cultural development ===
The Ferengi culture was centralized around the concept of greed and earning profit. Ferengi society most notably was based on a list of rules for business ventures with other Ferengi known as "The Rules of Acquisition." By the late 24th century, this list encompassed 285 rules that Ferengi males were to memorize and follow as part of business ventures with other Ferengi. As Quark once put it, "There is nothing beyond greed. Greed is the purest, most noble of emotions." Consequently, the 10th Rule of Acquisition stated that "greed is eternal." However, there was a time in their history before the founding of the Ferengi Alliance that the Ferengi were an extremely generous people who were not greedy. (DS9: "Prophet Motive")
However, the Ferengi managed to avoid many of the worst aspects of an evolving culture, and their social history was notable for the absence of atrocities such as slavery or genocide, a distinction the Ferengi felt made them morally superior (though their definition of "slavery" clearly did not extend to their treatment of women). Ferengi culture slowly grew out of its early stages by introducing a remarkable economic system that developed from early bartering systems to become one of the leading cultures in interstellar commerce. (DS9: "The Jem'Hadar", "Little Green Men")
Unlike most other cultures, who frequently idolized warriors or politicians, businessmen were the pillars of Ferengi society for millennia. This tendency led to the slow merging of business and political fields in Ferengi culture, and that influence was evident in the near-universal application of the Rules of Acquisition as both a personal and financial code of ethics.
The Rules of Acquisition provided advice that all good Ferengi followed to lead a profitable life. For example, the first Rule of Acquisition was "Once you have their money, you never give it back."
In addition to the Rules, the Ferengi also recognized the Five Stages of Acquisition: infatuation, justification, appropriation, obsession, and resale. (VOY: "Alice") They also recognized these traits in other species; Earth's Wall Street was regarded with near-religious reverence by Ferengi. (VOY: "11:59")
The drive for individual gain in Ferengi society led to inventions that spread across many species of the galaxy. Examples included such diverse items as holosuites, synthehol, and the popular drink Slug-o-Cola. (DS9: "Body Parts", "Profit and Lace")

The social norm of acquisition made Ferengi with other motivations remarkable to their peers. One of those, Leck, stated that he "didn't care about latinum" and sought only the thrill of the kill and was subsequently described by Quark as an "eliminator" whose "priorities are different" from "typical Ferengi"; Nog agreed with the assessment, and Brunt later described Leck as a "psychopath." (DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi") Despite their profit-based culture, the Ferengi were also known to love and care for their family to the extent that these sentiments could even take precedence over the pursuit of profit. (TNG: "The Battle", "Bloodlines")


=== Role of women ===
Ferengi society and culture were highly misogynistic and patriarchal. As such, laws and cultural norms reflected and deeply institutionalized such misogyny and discrimination.
Ferengi women were referred to as "females." They were barred from most aspects of society, such as not being allowed to earn profit or to travel. Neither were they allowed to learn how to read. (DS9: "Rules of Acquisition") They were not even allowed to wear clothes and were expected to be undressed at all times, to the point where while a Ferengi male would consider clothed alien women to be normal, the thought of their mother wearing clothes would make them uncomfortable. "Thinking about things," as Quark once put it, was neither something expected nor desired of females. Neither was having opinions or political views. They further were not allowed to have any claim to the estate of a husband should the marriage end, as all females were generally required to sign a Waiver of Property and Profit, giving up any such claim. (DS9: "Ferengi Love Songs")
If a woman was caught earning profit, she was forced to give back all she had earned and either sign a confession, admitting the error of her ways, or be sold into indentured servitude if she refused. Her male relatives would then have to make restitution. A woman's oldest male relative was considered to be legally in control of her and thus responsible for her actions, such as her husband or the oldest son. (DS9: "Family Business")
Marriage, like everything else in Ferengi culture, was a business contract signed between the prospective groom and the bride's father, in which the father leased his daughter to the groom for a set period (usually five years) for an agreed fee, paid on the birth of a son. (DS9: "Doctor Bashir, I Presume") Pregnancies were considered rentals under Ferengi law, with the father being the lessee. (DS9: "Nor the Battle to the Strong")
As described by Quark, in a marriage "on the Ferengi homeworld, husbands and wives never argue. There's no divorce, no broken homes – nothing but peaceful, conjugal bliss." (DS9: "Fascination")
In addition to being forbidden to earn profit and own property, Ferengi females were not allowed to wear clothes, leave their homes without a male escort, or speak to males they were not related to. Their role as caregivers to the male children of a family was strictly defined. Mothers were expected to teach their children the Rules of Acquisition (and as they were not allowed to read, they had to know the Rules by heart) and to soften their male children's food by chewing it for them. (TNG: "The Last Outpost", "Ménage à Troi"; DS9: "Life Support", "Family Business") Because of this, Ferengi males were often very protective and loving of their mothers, and this was even reflected in the Rules of Acquisition; Rule 31 was "Never make fun of a Ferengi's Mother." (DS9: "The Siege")
By the late 24th century, females made up 53.5% of the Ferengi population, and some Ferengi began to realize that the exclusion of females from business represented a significant loss of profit opportunities right on their homeworld. In the latter half of the century, Ishka – Quark's mother – and Grand Nagus Zek led a movement aimed at reforming cultural traditions that had excluded women, starting by giving females the right to wear clothing. The idea was that giving females that right allowed them to have pockets. Once they had pockets, they would likely want to fill them with latinum, so they were going to need jobs. After they started earning latinum, they were going to want to spend it, which meant Ferenginar would expand its workforce and consumer base at the same time. Initial progress toward this goal seemed less than promising, but by 2375, with the ascension of the progressive Rom to the position of Grand Nagus, the likelihood of further reforms seemed inevitable. (DS9: "Profit and Lace", "The Dogs of War")
Because of the long-standing ban on the acquisition of profit by females, any female wishing to engage in commerce had to either bury evidence of her involvement in a transaction or appear as a male. Notably, Pel not only altered the manner of her attire but also disguised her breasts and the size of her lobes to be included in Quark's financial decision-making. Using this disguised appearance, she was involved in the first recorded business transaction between the Alpha and Gamma Quadrants. A contract would likely not have been concluded without her input, making it at the time the most significant financial achievement by a Ferengi female. (DS9: "Rules of Acquisition") Her skill in successfully negotiating the contract between the Ferengi and the Karemma later had a profound impact on the entire Alpha Quadrant. It provided the basis for the Federation to make first contact with the Founders, which in turn led to the Dominion War. (DS9: "The Search, Part I")
Quark himself was later involved in an even more significant instance of cross-dressing, one that thereafter fundamentally altered the nature of Ferengi society. After Grand Nagus Zek attempted to give women the right to wear clothes, he was immediately displaced from power by Brunt and forced to set up a government-in-exile on Deep Space 9. While there, Zek tried to convince top Ferengi businessmen to join him for a conference to demonstrate the intelligence of women, using Ishka as his exemplar. When she collapsed after suffering a heart attack, Quark had to fake being the female "Lumba" to impress Nilva, an ultra-conservative manufacturer of Slug-o-Cola. Quark received gender reassignment surgery for the occasion, which was reversed afterward. Quark's "Lumba" sufficiently influenced Nilva to call for, and get the immediate reinstatement of, Zek as Nagus. Zek's women's rights agenda therefore continued. (DS9: "Profit and Lace")
By 2381, clothed females could be seen on Ferenginar openly walking alone in public or accompanying their children themselves. Women's clothes also featured designs previously seen on men's clothes, suggesting that native fashion designs for women had developed since Rom had taken power. One Slug-o-Cola commercial featured a clothed Ferengi female rejecting one Ferengi male for another that had just consumed Slug-o-Cola, telling the viewer that the beverage would make males more desirable to Ferengi females. This suggested that women were becoming more independent in being able to choose the male they wished to be with. (LD: "Parth Ferengi's Heart Place")
In 2383, at least one Ferengi woman, Nandi, held the rank of DaiMon. (PRO: "First Con-tact")


=== Rituals and traditions ===
Male Ferengi were introduced to the world on their Naming Day, one of few Ferengi ceremonies that included a tradition of bestowing (free) gifts on someone. (DS9: "Rivals")
The Ferengi Attainment Ceremony was a time in Ferengi tradition when an individual became old enough to make his own decisions. A young Ferengi who was about to embark on his first significant business opportunity might auction off personal items that had strong sentimental value to raise capital for his venture. (DS9: "Heart of Stone", "Little Green Men")

Ferengi greeted one another by putting their wrists together, hands apart, and fingers curled inward, equivalent to the old Human custom of shaking hands; Jadzia Dax and Quark regularly greeted one another in this manner. On the other hand, when agreeing upon a deal, two Ferengi placed the back of one hand against that of the other, and pulled it away to the side quickly, as if to signify mutual distrust and understanding. (DS9: "Business as Usual", "The Magnificent Ferengi")
A Ferengi acting in some form of service or submission was commonly known to bow very slightly, face up, making the same hand gesture used in greetings. The cultural connotations of displaying open hands were echoed again in the "obscene" gesture of a person waving empty hands above his head. (TNG: "The Last Outpost"; DS9: "The Emperor's New Cloak")
A Ferengi entering another Ferengi's home was required to pay an admission fee of one slip of latinum per person. One was also required to sign a waiver, acknowledging responsibility if something went missing following one's visit. A traditional greeting in such situations had the resident Ferengi welcoming the visitor to his home and reminding him that "My house is my house," to which the visitor replied, "As are its contents." (DS9: "Family Business")
The Ferengi had a legal tradition called plea bargaining. If a Ferengi required something, especially of importance, that had been taken by another individual, the Ferengi could give something that the individual required to have their item returned. (DS9: "Emissary")
Traditional Ferengi cuisine consisted largely of slugs, insects, grubs, and other creatures Humans would call "bugs." Many partook in the beetle snuff habit, snorting a fine powder of dried beetles. In one instance, Jake Sisko told Nog that he was helping his girlfriend, who was studying to become an entomologist, to which Nog replied, "What's an entomologist?" Jake explained that it was "someone who studies bugs." Nog, misunderstanding the science, replied, "Ohhh! She wants to become a chef!" However, only native bugs were considered edible, and foreign (off-planet) bugs were treated with disdain. (DS9: "Sanctuary", "The Jem'Hadar")

According to traditional Ferengi beliefs, the hammer represented sexual prowess. (TNG: "Birthright, Part I") Actual sexual practices of Ferengi were not well known but oo-mox, manual stimulation of the lobes, was widely practiced and could be performed by non-Ferengi. In accordance with their male-dominated society, it was not unusual for a Ferengi to have female servants who would perform oo-mox for him in public, as a means of pleasure and to communicate his status by overtly demonstrating that he could afford such luxuries. (TNG: "Ménage à Troi"; DS9: "The Nagus")
Appropriately for a materially obsessed species, the Ferengi demonstrated interest in cosmetic enhancements by way of tooth sharpeners and surgical procedures such as lobe enlargements to accompany the usual conspicuous displays of wealth. (DS9: "Little Green Men", "Family Business")


=== Language ===

Main article: Ferengi language
The Ferengi written language resembled a flow chart in appearance, with sixty-degree angles and text most commonly emanating outward from a central hexagon. The hexagon might remain fixed, possibly denoting subject or tense, as the text around it flowed, branched, expanded, and changed. (DS9: "Family Business")
Because their homeworld had an extremely rainy climate, the Ferengi had 178 different words for rain, in all its various forms. Conversely, there were no Ferengi words for crispy, as the condition was largely unknown to them. (DS9: "Let He Who Is Without Sin...")
There was also B'Zal, a Ferengi code that used patterns of light and darkness. (TNG: "Bloodlines")
The Ferengi generally pronounced the word "Humans" as "Hew-mons." There were exceptions to this, like Sovak who addressed Jean-Luc Picard several times as "Human" rather than "Hew-mon". (TNG: "Captain's Holiday")


=== Clothing ===

Ferengi military personnel wore uniforms that underwent a major change in style between 2364 and 2365. Other Ferengi wore elaborately designed, multi-layered suits.
Many Ferengi males wore a headdress, which consisted of a cloth wrapped around the back of the head.

After Nog and Rom joined Starfleet and the Bajoran Militia respectively, they wore headdresses in materials and colors that matched their uniforms. (DS9: "Facets", "Bar Association")
With females given more equality, by 2381 there were women on Ferenginar that not only wore clothes but with design features previously widely seen on male clothing. (LD: "Parth Ferengi's Heart Place")


=== Education ===
Ferengi education employed a work-study approach with apprenticeships in a wide range of business and economic fields – in other words, throwing students into the cutthroat competition of Ferengi commerce; anyone who survived graduated. (DS9: "A Man Alone")


=== Technology ===
Ferengi technology included the following personal weapons used by their species:

Energy whip
Ferengi phaser
Ferengi rifle
The Ferengi were able to engineer a fully functional Genesis Device. They also incorporated a paywall into their version of the device that would require anyone trying to disable it to insert two bars of latinum even while its timer to detonation continued counting down, as Nick Locarno discovered to his very brief regret. (LD: "Old Friends, New Planets")


=== Mirror universe ===
The Ferengi of the mirror universe were, for the most part, seen as far more compassionate and less greedy than their counterparts in the prime universe, often paying for this compassion with their lives. They were oppressed by the Klingon-Cardassian Alliance, during the 2370s, and several Ferengi were aligned with the Terran Rebellion. (DS9: "Crossover")


== Philosophy ==
In Ferengi philosophy, the pursuit of profit at any cost was the guiding principle for all traditional Ferengi. With the invention of currency and the concept of profit approximately 10,000 years ago, Ferengi philosophy began to evolve toward the pursuit of material wealth. This guiding principle became so basic to Ferengi that it was eventually codified in the Rules of Acquisition. (DS9: "Little Green Men", "Body Parts")


=== Ethics ===
Greed, deceit, distrust, and opportunism were highly prized values among Ferengi and all were represented within the Rules. The Ferengi belief in conducting all business dealings under the advisory caveat emptor, or "buyer beware", further reflected the pursuit of profit at all costs. (TNG: "The Last Outpost")
Though slavery (of men) was unknown in Ferengi society, exploitation was the rule. The formation of labor unions was forbidden, and indeed most Ferengi did not wish to eradicate exploitation but to become the exploiters. (DS9: "Bar Association")
If profit represented the ultimate goal to Ferengi, the loss of profit opportunity represented the ultimate punishment. Ferengi who broke the law could be punished with the loss of all property and assets. If the crime was deemed severe enough, the offending Ferengi's family could also suffer loss of profit opportunity and could even be sold into indentured servitude to repay their debts – both literal and philosophical. The binding nature of contracts was considered a supreme law in Ferengi society and breaking a contract with a fellow Ferengi was a severe crime. (DS9: "Family Business", "Body Parts")
Capital punishment was not unknown among Ferengi but perhaps even more feared was the revocation of a Ferengi's business license. Such an action prohibited other Ferengi from conducting business with the offender and virtually ostracized a Ferengi from his society, leaving him with so few opportunities for true profit that death might be preferable. (DS9: "Body Parts") Should capital punishment become necessary (such as for going on strike), the preferred method is defenestration from the top of the Tower of Commerce. Not only is the forty-story descent effective, but it allows those in the Sacred Marketplace below opportunities to place wagers on where the condemned will land. (DS9: "Bar Association")
Regard for profit above all else, including life, was also evident in the Ferengi attitude toward dealing in weapons and other military technology. Though the galaxy abounded in weapons dealers, the Ferengi had an approving attitude toward the profession. (TNG: "The Perfect Mate"; DS9: "Business as Usual") Similarly, the Ferengi attitude toward personal liberty was superseded by the desire for profit. Despite, or perhaps because of, never having endured slavery themselves, Ferengi showed themselves willing to engage in slave trading and the capturing of aliens for slave labor if profitable. (ENT: "Acquisition"; TNG: "Rascals")
In accordance with their extreme, crony capitalist mindset, Ferengi historical records on 21st century Earth described Wall Street with reverence. (VOY: "11:59")


=== Religion ===
The Ferengi cultural emphases on profit and wealth extended to spirituality, leading to a fairly robust and detailed religious life, even if the central philosophy behind the religion was relatively simple.
Ferengi spirituality flowed largely from their belief that the universe was bound together in the Great Material Continuum. A Ferengi who lived a good life (one who made a profit and accumulated wealth) was said to navigate the Great River of the Continuum. Such Ferengi were rewarded for their success in interpreting the wants and needs of this life by positioning themselves for success in the next life. (DS9: "Treachery, Faith and the Great River")

In the case of Ferengi, the mercantile belief in the finite but eternal nature of material accumulation meant that you could take it with you. Upon death, a Ferengi found himself before the Blessed Exchequer, to whom Ferengi prayed in life, and was evaluated based on the profit earned while alive. A successful Ferengi was allowed to bribe their way into the Divine Treasury, where the wealth he had accumulated could be used to bid on his next life, under the supervision of the Celestial Auctioneers. An unsuccessful Ferengi might find himself cast into the Vault of Eternal Destitution, never to return. (DS9: "Little Green Men", "Body Parts", "The Emperor's New Cloak")
By the end of the Dominion War, in 2375, over 40% of the population on Ferenginar no longer believed they had to buy their way into the Divine Treasury. (DS9: "The Dogs of War")
The Ferengi death ritual prohibited an autopsy from being performed on a deceased Ferengi. However, it was accepted practice for a Ferengi to auction off his vacuum-desiccated remains after death, providing the opportunity for their loved ones or enemies to own a piece of the Ferengi after his passing and as a final opportunity to raise capital for the soon-to-be deceased. A total of 52 disks were produced from a single body (TNG: "Suspicions"; DS9: "The Nagus", "Body Parts")


== Government ==

The Ferengi Alliance was the main political body of the Ferengi. It was dedicated to the promotion of profit and commerce and was overseen by a Grand Nagus, who acted as both head of state and principal business leader. The Nagus' power was supported by both the Ferengi Bill of Opportunities as well as the Rules of Acquisition. (DS9: "Profit and Lace")
The Ferengi Commerce Authority, or FCA, was an agency of the Alliance concerned with business practices and the enforcement of trade under the Ferengi Trade By-Laws and Ferengi Code. Agents of the FCA were known as Liquidators and were governed by the Board of Liquidators. The FCA tightly regulated Ferengi business affairs in all industries and throughout the quadrant.
Additional government institutions included the Ferengi Gaming Commission, Ferengi Health Commission, and the Ferengi Trade Mission. (DS9: "Ferengi Love Songs"; VOY: "Infinite Regress"; TNG: "The Perfect Mate")
Generally, the Ferengi Alliance stayed neutral in the politics of the galaxy, since the Ferengi were solely interested in profit, and making enemies would diminish business opportunities. In the spirit of free enterprise, most Ferengi business ventures were made without the knowledge of the government. Several hostile conflicts occurred between the Federation and the Ferengi in the 2360s. However, the Ferengi Alliance itself was not held responsible, despite the Ferengi being more distasteful than most according to Federation Values. Ferengi starships therefore operated more like privately owned privateers, striking deals where they could, and stealing at phaser-point when they couldn't. (TNG: "Peak Performance") Quark once claimed that the Ferengi had never fought an interstellar war. (DS9: "The Jem'Hadar")
The importance of business was felt even in Ferengi government, as powerful businessmen could easily become powerful political figures, representing their companies the way states or worlds are represented in most other cultures.
The neutral tendencies of the Ferengi and their government were evident in the 34th and 35th Rules of Acquisition: "War is good for business" and "Peace is good for business." Counter-intuitively, this neutral status often enhanced the influence of the Ferengi Alliance in the galaxy. By positioning themselves as interested only in commerce, not only did Ferengi manage to avoid being embroiled in larger conflicts, such as the Dominion War; but they also made themselves available as intermediaries. Ferengi trade representatives often accompanied other governments on diplomatic missions where trade negotiations might serve to open the door to more extensive relations between trade partners who might otherwise have difficulty doing business because of the political climate. (DS9: "Starship Down")
In keeping with their neutral tradition, the Ferengi did not maintain a standing military force and were generally considered ineffectual in most military matters. However, the role of DaiMon in Ferengi commerce was a quasi-military rank and the Alliance did provide the use of starships, notably the D'Kora-class marauders, for mercantile exploration and, in some cases, defense of business interests. (TNG: "Ménage à Troi")


=== See also ===
Ferengi Market Exchange
Ferengi Futures Exchange


== History ==

See main article: Ferengi history
It took around 10,000 years to build the Ferengi Alliance. Gint became the first Grand Nagus and was the original author of the Ferengi Rules of Acquisition. While this cemented their greedy and materialistic society, atrocities such as slavery and interstellar wars were notably absent from Ferengi history. (DS9: "The Jem'Hadar", "Little Green Men", "Body Parts")


=== Contact with Humanity ===
A temporal incident caused a quasi-first contact with Humans in 1947. After they had purchased warp drive technology, the Ferengi encountered spacefaring Humans as early as 2151, albeit in a covert manner without disclosing their identity. Despite the Battle of Maxia in 2355, official first contact with the Federation did not occur until 2364. (ENT: "Acquisition"; TNG: "The Last Outpost", "The Battle"; DS9: "Little Green Men")
Notwithstanding a few aggressive incursions against Starfleet over the following years, both sides maintained sufficient relations for Ferengi representatives to participate in Federation-hosted events or for Starfleet ships to answer Ferengi distress calls. (TNG: "The Price", "Ménage à Troi", "The Perfect Mate") Upon the (re-)discovery of the Bajoran wormhole to the Gamma Quadrant in 2369, the Ferengi Alliance under Grand Nagus Zek was the first Alpha Quadrant power to learn of the existence of the Dominion via its aggressive pursuit of new business opportunities beyond the wormhole. (DS9: "Rules of Acquisition", "The Jem'Hadar")


== People ==
List of Ferengi


== Planets ==
List of Ferengi planets