Kimara Cretak was a female Romulan and politician who served as a senator in the Romulan Senate during the late-24th century Romulan Empire.


== History ==
In 2375, Cretak was a firm supporter of the Romulans' alliance with the Federation and the Klingons against the Dominion. She further took an active role and served as the Romulan representative to Deep Space 9. In this capacity, she worked directly with Admiral Ross, Captain Sisko, and Colonel Kira to coordinate fleet deployment and maintenance of Romulan forces in the area. (DS9: "Image in the Sand", "Shadows and Symbols", "Inter Arma Enim Silent Leges")
Cretak would develop a cordial working relationship with Kira, however, Cretak also authorized the Romulan fortification of Derna against the Bajorans' wishes, because she believed it was in the best interests of the Romulan people, under the guise of a hospital. While Ross supported her initially, she later rescinded her decision during a standoff between Romulan and Bajoran forces led by Kira when she met Starfleet opposition. (DS9: "Image in the Sand", "Shadows and Symbols")
Cretak was not without complaints to the Alliance. She once complained that Klingon forces were higher priority than Romulan warbirds for maintenance. She met resistance from Worf and General Martok when they made the argument that they fight more vigorously, though she viewed it as reckless.
Cretak later attended a conference on Romulus in which several topics were to be discussed about Dominion technology, with Doctor Julian Bashir as a featured speaker. During this conference, she would be the victim of a Federation Section 31 plot to put Chairman Koval, who was informing Section 31, on a seat in the Continuing Committee, a seat for which she herself was in competition. Bashir, who was also unaware of the plot, approached her, believing that a secret Romulan Section 31 operative planned to assassinate Koval. To thwart it, Bashir asked her to search Koval's personal database for Luther Sloan's possible accomplices, to which Cretak reluctantly agreed. She was arrested while attempting to access the files, and brought before the Committee. Despite her honesty in front of the Committee, and Bashir's corroboration, Koval brought Sloan in as a witness and argued Cretak was part of the plot, forcing her to accept that even if she wasn't part of the plot she would still be a fool who had been manipulated by a Starfleet Intelligence agent into committing treason and accessing secured files. The Committee agreed and found Cretak guilty of treason, dismissing her from the Senate as well as postponing her sentencing to a later date.
Admiral William Ross later justified his complicity in Cretak's downfall by noting that she was a "patriot" who would recommend that the Romulans pursue a separate peace with the Dominion if she believed it was to her people's advantage. According to Admiral Ross, after being dismissed from the Senate, Cretak would most likely be imprisoned, and possibly executed. (DS9: "Inter Arma Enim Silent Leges")


== Memorable quotes ==
"My people have a reputation for arrogance. I'm afraid it's well earned."
"But you're different. Or so Admiral Ross tells me."
"The admiral and I have a good working relationship. I hope to have a similar one with you."
"I'd like nothing more."

- Kimara Cretak and Kira Nerys, during their first meeting (DS9: "Image in the Sand")

"I had no idea Bajorans were so efficient."
"Coming from a Romulan, that's quite a compliment."

- Kimara Cretak and Kira Nerys (DS9: "Image in the Sand")

"You can talk about compromise all you want. Any ship attempting to break through that blockade will be fired on."
"Colonel, do you seriously believe that your antiquated collection of impulse ships stand a chance against our warbirds?"
"We'll find out soon enough, won't we? End transmission."

- Kira Nerys and Kimara Cretak, during the Derna crisis (DS9: "Shadows and Symbols")

"You still think she's going to back down?"
"She has to, because I won't."

- William Ross and Kimara Cretak, of Kira Nerys during the Derna crisis (DS9: "Shadows and Symbols")

"Don't tell me this is your first glass of Romulan ale."
"Well, it was illegal."
"That never stopped most of your colleagues."

- Kimara Cretak and William Ross (DS9: "Inter Arma Enim Silent Leges")