Koval was a Romulan male who served as Chairman of the Tal Shiar during the late-24th century.


== Career ==
During the Dominion War, Koval became an opponent of the Federation Alliance, advocating that the Romulan Star Empire should seek a separate peace with the Dominion. This outspoken stance was believed to be the reason he had not been elevated to the Continuing Committee, as was usually the case for the chairman of the Tal Shiar. Koval often stated that there was a Federation spy in the Romulan Senate.
According to Luther Sloan, Koval was involved in the death of Vice Admiral Fujisaki, Deputy Chief of Starfleet Intelligence, in 2374.
By 2375, Koval had been diagnosed with Tuvan Syndrome and shared this information with the Continuing Committee. According to Julian Bashir's diagnosis, the disease was in its very early stages, expecting a loss of motor skills in ten to fifteen years and an overall life expectancy of twenty to twenty-five years.
In that year, Koval attended a conference between the Federation and the Romulan Empire on Romulus. He approached Julian Bashir and asked him if the Quickening virus could be replicated and later attended a lecture that Bashir gave about the disease. It was at the lecture that Bashir noticed Koval's displaced eyelids, weakness in his facial muscles and irregular respiration, leading to his diagnosis of Tuvan Syndrome.
Later, and stalling for time while he believed Sloan was going to assassinate Koval, Bashir was given a microcellular adhesive to gain a skin sample from him, which could prove whether or not Koval had Tuvan syndrome. Bashir got the sample, but was detained and interrogated by Koval.
Koval later appeared before the Continuing Committee and told them that Section 31 did not exist, and that it had been fabricated by Sloan to seek revenge on Koval for the death of Fujisaki, without implicating the Federation as a whole.
After finishing delivering his findings to Praetor Neral, the Romulan leader told Sloan that he would be detained by the Tal Shiar. Sloan suddenly reached for a disruptor of a Romulan guard but was apparently vaporized by Koval.
William Ross later revealed to Bashir that Koval was a Federation operative and had been working with Starfleet Intelligence for more than a year. He was unaware of how long the Romulans had been working with Section 31. The "assassination plot" was in actuality a collaborative effort between Starfleet, Section 31 and Koval himself to ensure Kimara Cretak's dismissal from the Senate so that he would get his placement on the Continuing Committee instead of her. Koval's previous record of opposing the Federation Alliance would then serve to reinforce his arguments to keep the alliance intact. Koval's placement gave the Federation an ally inside the highest reaches of the Romulan government. (DS9: "Inter Arma Enim Silent Leges")


== Memorable quotes ==
"It's a pleasure to meet you."
"Why?"
"Well, you've got me there. It's just a simple form of expression, I suppose."
"And like most Human expressions, completely devoid of meaning."

- Julian Bashir and Koval

"What shall we talk about?"
"Why you're really on Romulus, who you're working for and, of course, who's helping you. Don't worry. I won't waste your time with pointless questions… This can be painful or not. That's up to you, Doctor. Either way, I will know what you know."

- Julian Bashir and Koval, during an interrogation

"What I don't understand is why? Why did you come here and take the risk of being discovered?"
"I had to make sure nothing went wrong. And I wanted to watch you die."
"You broke the cardinal rule of our profession. You allowed business to become personal."

- Koval and Luther Sloan