Malok was a Romulan who served under Sub-Commander Vrek on a military vessel of the Romulan Star Empire during the late 24th century. His mother had killed more than one traitor, though not before his eventual superior had begun a career made from "stabbing commanders in the back".
In 2381, Malok and another junior officer were assigned to clean up after the torture and dismemberment of a Reman prisoner, during which they boasted of their respective plans of betrayal against Vrek. Malok was then summoned to the bridge, as their ship had been confronted by an unknown vessel. Puzzled as to how they had been detected, Vrek asked Malok if he was responsible, to which Malok replied that he craved Vrek's demise but not to the point of sabotage. Vrek ordered the interloper destroyed, but the crew suddenly found their systems shutting down, whereupon their ship was attacked and captured by the unknown vessel. (LD: "I Have No Bones Yet I Must Flee")
In reality, Malok was mutinying against Vrek and was intending to join Nova Fleet. The ship, Nova One, stunned Vrek and the other commanding officers; after this, Malok marooned Vrek on Sherbal V and usurped control of the ship. When Beckett Mariner disrupted Nick Locarno's announcement of Nova Fleet's existence and fled with the Genesis Device Locarno had intended to use as leverage, Malok tried to dissuade Locarno from pursuing the USS Passaro, which Mariner had hijacked to escape. However, Locarno refused to back down because the device was his only deterrent. To compel them to obey his order to pursue the Passaro, Locarno reminded him and another officer that the Star Empire would treat them harshly for their mutiny.
As Mariner exited an icy ring system, Malok's vessel found her and ambushed her near an ion storm. Mariner attempted to convince Malok to turn on Locarno, but he did not listen, and the rest of Nova Fleet cornered her, forcing her into the ion storm. Realizing how dangerous it was, Malok refused to follow Nova One in. When the USS Cerritos breached the supposedly impenetrable trynar shield by throwing an Orion battleship at it, Malok allowed the Bynars on Nova One to beam onto his vessel and abandoned Locarno alongside the rest of Nova Fleet. (LD: "The Inner Fight", "Old Friends, New Planets")