Nanclus was the Romulan ambassador to the Federation in 2293, where he was involved in a conspiracy to sabotage peace talks between the Federation and the Klingon Empire. 
When the Klingon Ambassador explained to the Federation President that James Kirk and Leonard McCoy were arrested according to the articles of Interstellar Law, following the assassination of Klingon chancellor Gorkon, Vulcan Ambassador Sarek reluctantly agreed with his colleague's interpretation of the law. Sensing inevitable outcome of the situation, the Federation President inquired to Nanclus as to what the position of the Romulan government was on the issue. Nanclus wilily explained that "[i]n the absence of specific instructions from my government, I must concur with my colleagues." Not buying the answer, the President asked if he seriously believed Kirk assassinated the Chancellor, and Nanclus reluctantly responded, "Mr. President, I don't know what to believe."
In a later meeting, Nanclus lent his support to "Operation Retrieve," the proposal to infiltrate Klingon space and rescue the hostages, put forth by Nanclus' fellow conspirator, Colonel West.  He pushed his support by stating, "[t]hey ARE vulnerable. There'll never be a better time..." 
Later, when Spock finally discovered that Valeris was also a co-conspirator, he was able to determine from her that Nanclus was among her fellow conspirators.
Simultaneously, Nanclus was in attendance at the Khitomer Conference, where he sat with Vulcan Ambassador Sarek. As the conspirator's planned attempt to assassinate the Federation President was about to unfold, Nanclus glanced over to his visibly sweating co-conspirator, Vice Admiral Cartwright.
After the crew of the USS Enterprise-A learned of his involvement in the conspiracy, and successfully prevented the assassination of the Federation President at the conference, he was held at phaser-point by Doctor Leonard McCoy before being detained by Starfleet. (Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country)