Narissa was a female Romulan Tal Shiar colonel in the late 24th century. She was also a member of the Zhat Vash, and was part of the Conclave of Eight. 

Before the Attack on Mars in 2385, Narissa was part of the same group of Zhat Vash to experience the Admonition on Aia as her aunt, Ramdha. This group was overseen by Commodore Oh, a Vulcan/Romulan hybrid who had infiltrated Starfleet. Together, they formed the Conclave of Eight to plan an attack on Mars to manipulate the Federation into banning the creation of artificial lifeforms. (PIC: "Broken Pieces")
In 2399, she underwent temporary surgical alteration to pose as a Human and assumed the identity of Oh's personal aide, Lieutenant Rizzo. From this position, she directed efforts by the Zhat Vash to apprehend Dahj Asha on Earth as part of an effort to obtain information on the whereabouts of several existing biological androids. 
The first attempt, in Boston, resulted in the death of Dahj's boyfriend and the deaths of the operatives involved; the second, in San Francisco, witnessed by retired admiral Jean-Luc Picard, resulted in Dahj's death. Oh chastised Narissa for making "a shambles" of these operations on Earth, and in no uncertain terms stated that the lives of Narissa and her best agent were on the line for any more failures with the Zhat Vash mission. (PIC: "Remembrance", "Maps and Legends")
Narissa then focused on Dahj's twin Soji, serving as her younger brother Narek's handler as he infiltrated the Romulan Reclamation Site. She had given approval for Narek's approach of building a relationship with Soji as a means to acquire information, but after Oh's reprimand expressed impatience at his slow pace of uncovering useful intelligence. Contacting him by hologram, she stated that she was concerned for his well-being, but with their lives at risk, her self-preservation would come first. (PIC: "Maps and Legends") She warned Narek against coming to love Soji, saying it would threaten their mission. (PIC: "The End is the Beginning")
After Seven of Nine began to reactivate the Artifact, Narissa began jettisoning Borg drones into space after murdering a large number of reclaimed xBs. She was eventually overwhelmed by the xBs and sought refuge elsewhere in the Borg cube. (PIC: "Broken Pieces")
After the Artifact arrived at Coppelius, where it later crash landed, Narissa briefly encountered her brother, Narek. She bade him well on his task and let him go off on his own, before later confronting Seven of Nine in hand to hand combat, where Seven eventually knocked Narissa into a chasm within the cube, claiming that this fate was what she deserved for having killed Hugh. (PIC: "Et in Arcadia Ego, Part 2")


== Memorable quotes ==