Brunt was a male Ferengi of the 24th century Ferengi Alliance. He was a liquidator for the Ferengi Commerce Authority. He often wore a bar of gold-pressed latinum on a chain around his neck.


== Career ==
Brunt was given the task of dealing with Ishka, Quark's mother, in 2371 after she was found to have illegally earned profit. He used the threat of selling Ishka into indentured servitude to persuade Quark to get her to confess to her crimes. (DS9: "Family Business") Brunt later returned to Deep Space 9 to investigate a strike at Quark's by Quark's employees who had formed a union. After these two encounters with Quark, Brunt grew to hate him. (DS9: "Bar Association")
Brunt had the joy of revoking Quark's business license in 2372, after Quark broke a contract with him. Quark had sold Brunt the vacuum-desiccated remains of himself for 500 bars of latinum, but later found out that he was not going to die. Brunt seized Quark's assets and expelled him from the Ferengi business world. However, the generosity of the staff and residents of DS9 helped mitigate this punishment to Quark and allowed him to continue his bar business in defiance of Brunt's intentions. (DS9: "Body Parts")
In 2373, Brunt concocted a scheme to install himself as the new Grand Nagus, by exposing Grand Nagus Zek's failing business mind. His plan was foiled by Quark, who helped Zek reunite with Quark's business-minded mother. (DS9: "Ferengi Love Songs") 
Following his betrayal, Brunt was fired from the FCA. Brunt later hoped to regain his old job by joining a rescue mission commissioned by Zek and led by Quark to rescue Ishka, who had been taken prisoner by the Dominion. Quark and the other team members initially did not welcome Brunt's efforts to join the group until he revealed his ownership of a shuttle. 
While the team was showing a notable lack of success in simulated engagements with Jem'Hadar soldiers on in the holosuite, Brunt suggesting starting off with something easier like ambushing Bolians. Team member, Nog, angrily retorted that Brunt couldn't ambush a Bolian if the Bolian was blindfolded and tied to a tree.
Once it became clear that the team was not qualified to engage in a rescue mission, they instead arranged a prisoner exchange on Empok Nor. Brunt, along with Leck and Gaila were infuriated when they discovered Quark and Rom were going to cheat them out of most of the reward money.  Their problems grew much more serious, however, when the resulting argument led to Gaila accidentally shooting and killing their own Vorta prisoner Keevan.  With some creative use of some neural stimulators, however, they were able to revive Keevan's body long enough distract the Dominion party, allowing Quark to rescue Ishka, while Rom and Brunt shot and killed a Jem'Hadar soldier and took another Vorta, Yelgrun, prisoner. 
(DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi")
Brunt finally maneuvered his way to the throne by 2374, becoming Acting Nagus after Zek was deposed by the Ferengi Commerce Authority. Zek had enacted a set of reforms to give Ferengi women equal rights. With the help of Quark, Zek regained the support of enough commissioners of the Ferengi Commerce Authority to return to his position. Brunt returned to his job as a liquidator. (DS9: "Profit and Lace")
When Zek returned to Deep Space 9 in 2375 to install the next Grand Nagus, Brunt believed Quark was to take the throne. Ever the opportunist, he wasted no time in lavishing praise on his former enemy and offered his services as financial adviser. However, it was in fact Quark's brother, Rom, who was installed as Nagus. Brunt later made the same offer to Rom, though Nog did not appreciate the offer and escorted him away. (DS9: "The Dogs of War")
In 2401, Brunt was identified as a known associate of the Ferengi Sneed in his Starfleet criminal record. (PIC: "Disengage", "Imposters")