Ishka, daughter of Adred (nicknamed Moogie) was the mother of Quark and Rom, and was romantically involved with Grand Nagus Zek. She played a crucial role in initiating reforms which took place in Ferengi society in 2375.


== Life ==
Ishka was born sometime before 2274, as she had once indicated in 2374 that her lobes hadn't been "this firm in over a century." (DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi")
Ishka was married to Keldar, a good man who didn't have the mind for business that was needed in Ferengi society. Ishka attempted to help her husband in financial matters, but he refused to listen to her because she was a female. Despite this, Ishka still loved her partner as someone who known everything about family. When Quark and Rom were children, Ishka taught them to memorize their first copies of the Rules of Acquisition. 
Following Keldar's death, Ishka began conducting secret business transactions in violation of Ferengi law, since as a female, she was forbidden to acquire profit in Ferengi society. Amassing a large fortune, Ishka was eventually discovered by the Ferengi Commerce Authority. Her son Quark was forced to travel to Ferenginar to handle the matter. Quark discovered that Ishka had earned far more profit than he expected, and that it would be impossible for him to make restitutions for her.
After much strife between mother and son, Quark finally convinced his Moogie to make a full confession so that she could avoid being sold into indentured servitude and his business would be saved. Ishka returned the money she made to the FCA, though only she and her other son Rom knew that she had only given one-third of the profits back. (DS9: "Family Business")
When Kira Nerys and Odo saw Quark with a holo-imager in 2371, he claimed it was to record an image of the Promenade that he was to send to Ishka. (DS9: "Meridian")
Later that year, Nog visited Ishka. (DS9: "Prophet Motive")
Quark visited Ishka while on Ferenginar, negotiating a vole belly deal, in late 2372. Upon returning to the space station, Quark relayed to Rom that Ishka sent her love. (DS9: "Body Parts")

Ishka competed in the Global Tongo Championship, female division, in 2373. She began passing tips to Grand Nagus Zek during his games, helping him win the competition. The two began corresponding afterwards, with Ishka at first concealing her identity as a female. When she eventually revealed herself to Zek, he was furious until he realized that they were in love. Later, as Zek's mind began to fail, Ishka realized that his deterioration would cause the deterioration of the Ferengi economy. She began discreetly giving him assistance in financial matters, keeping the Ferengi business world going from behind the scenes.
Eventually, FCA Liquidator Brunt discovered their relationship and plotted for Quark to break them up, in exchange for restoring his Ferengi business license. Brunt hoped that, without Ishka, Zek would be deposed as Nagus, and then he could take Zek's place. After Quark discovered the state of Zek's mind, he reunited the two lovers. (DS9: "Ferengi Love Songs")
During the Dominion War, Ishka traveled to Vulcan to get her ears raised. During the return trip to Ferenginar, her transport was captured by the Dominion. Grand Nagus Zek commanded Quark to rescue her. Quark arranged a prisoner exchange on station Empok Nor, trading the Vorta Keevan for Ishka. (DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi") The exchange didn't quite go as planned, since Keevan was inadvertently killed moments before the exchange took place, but thanks to some improvised engineering by Nog and quick thinking by the others in the group, Quark was not only able to effect the transfer and save Ishka, but capture the other Vorta Yelgrun in the process. In gratitude for allowing them to use Keevan to conduct the exchange, Quark gave Yelgrun to the Federation for interrogation.
Under Ishka's influence, Zek began reforming Ferengi society in 2374. After an amendment to the Ferengi Bill of Opportunities caused Zek to be deposed, Ishka attempted to arrange his comeback. She set up a meeting with an important FCA commissioner on Deep Space 9. During a fight with Quark, she had a heart attack and was unable to attend the meeting. Quark posed as Zek's "other female financial adviser" and convinced commissioner Nilva to vote for Zek's reinstatement. Ishka recovered after receiving a new heart. (DS9: "Profit and Lace")
After influencing Zek to pass even more extreme reforms on Ferenginar, Ishka and the Nagus retired to Risa in 2375. They stopped at Deep Space 9 to instate Rom as the new Grand Nagus. (DS9: "The Dogs of War")


== Philosophy ==
Ishka was never a typical Ferengi female. She defied almost every tenet and taboo of Ferengi philosophy and law regarding women; she spoke to strangers and refused to chew her children's food (although she sometimes offered to "pre-chew" Quark's food, as a gesture of motherly compassion). (DS9: "Family Business") Later in life, she wore clothes, made profit, left the Ferengi homeworld, things which were illegal in Ferengi society, and helped bring about the reformation of Ferengi society. Ultimately, she influenced Zek to choose her son Rom as his successor, ensuring that her reforms would live on in the future. (DS9: "The Dogs of War") It was Ishka's hope that one day a Ferengi woman would take her "rightful place" as Grand Nagus of the Ferengi Alliance. (DS9: "Profit and Lace")


== Personal relationships ==
When it came to interacting with other people, Ishka was quite amicable and offered sound financial advice. Even while she was held prisoner by the Dominion, she had friendly conversations with the Vorta Yelgrun, informing him about such things as the importance of a diversified portfolio. However, she was also willing to stand up for herself and wasn't willing to put up with nonsense. (DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi")

Ishka loved her husband, who she felt was a good man, but he was unsuccessful in his commercial ventures, and while Rom inherited Keldar's heart, Quark inherited Ishka's lobes.
Rom and Ishka were very close when he was a child, and they remained close when Rom moved away from Ferenginar, with Ishka describing him as her favorite; however, Ishka and Quark quarreled constantly. He did not approve of her lifestyle and resented her for earning more profit than him. Additionally, Quark believed that the reason his father, Keldar, had been such a failure was because of Ishka's unorthodox ways, oblivious to her true financial genius. Nonetheless, Ishka always loved Quark, and she was still his "Moogie." (DS9: "Family Business")

The romance between Ishka and Zek blossomed because she was willing to open his eyes to life beyond profit. When Zek was deposed temporarily, Quark became furious with Ishka, as he believed that she had been using Zek to advance her feminist agenda all along. She had been instrumental in the emancipation of females, but she maintained that Zek had made the decisions. Regardless of Ishka's motives, Quark accused her of being the worst thing that ever happened to the Ferengi Alliance. As Ishka pointed out, Zek was lonely and miserable prior to becoming involved with her. In addition to enlightening Zek's mind, Ishka was responsible for helping the Nagus' failing memory run the Alliance until their retirement to Risa together. (DS9: "Ferengi Love Songs", "The Dogs of War")