Keldar was a Ferengi, the husband of Ishka and the father of Quark and Rom, and by extension, grandfather to Nog. 
According to Ishka, he wasn't a very successful businessman, but he knew "everything" about family. His son, Rom, confirmed his lack of financial acumen, noting that he went from one bad deal to the next. However, Keldar was still a very traditional Ferengi, and refused to take business advice from his wife, despite the fact that she was actually far more adept at financial matters than he was. He once said to Quark, "I don't know what I'm going to do about that female...", referring to Ishka's headstrong tendencies. Despite this, Ishka still considered Keldar a good husband that she loved. (DS9: "The House of Quark", "Family Business")
For Rom's Naming Day, Keldar bought the presents. On the day, Quark substituted the presents with old vegetables and sold them for far more than their father had paid for them. (DS9: "Rivals")
Keldar advised Quark not to leave Ferenginar, saying he had enough business opportunities at home, but Quark preferred to listen to the seventy-fifth Rule of Acquisition – "Home is where the heart is, but the stars are made of latinum." – and left Ferenginar. (DS9: "Civil Defense")
Keldar died some time before 2371. (DS9: "Family Business")
Early that year, Quark announced himself as "Quark, son of Keldar" upon entering the Great Hall on Qo'noS to answer the challenge of D'Ghor. Later, when Rom told Quark that money wasn't everything, Quark chastised him, saying, "If Father were alive, he'd wash your mouth out with galcor." (DS9: "The House of Quark")
Later that year, after being placed in charge of Grand Nagus Zek's benevolent fund, Rom managed to embezzle a significant amount of money from the fund.  When Rom revealed this to his brother, Quark responded that Father would have been proud. (DS9: "Prophet Motive")
To ensure Jadzia Dax would enter the Klingon afterlife in Sto-vo-kor, Quark joined Miles O'Brien, Doctor Julian Bashir and Worf under the command of General Martok in a raid on the Monac shipyard. When boarding the ship, Quark declared himself in traditional Klingon custom as "Quark, son of Keldar". (DS9: "Shadows and Symbols")