Leck was a Ferengi entrepreneur and a professional eliminator. Unlike most Ferengi, however – he was more interested in honing his combat skills than in earning profit. Perhaps his best skill was knife-throwing.
In 2373, Leck had the opportunity to receive business advice from Grand Nagus Zek. (DS9: "Ferengi Love Songs")

Leck gave potential clients specific instructions to contact him only via a secure channel.
In 2374, Leck was recruited by Quark to join a team of Ferengi commandos that were trying to rescue Quark's mother Ishka from the Dominion. Leck eagerly joined for the opportunity to test his skills against the Jem'Hadar.  Even after their mission switched to a prisoner exchange, Quark was wary enough of the Dominion that he retained Leck and the others.
However, although he claimed he had no interest in gold-pressed latinum, he also hated being cheated – as Quark tried to do by telling the team that there was only a twenty-bar reward, when in fact Zek had promised 50 bars.
Although the prisoner exchange was botched when Gaila accidentally killed their prisoner Keevan, Leck managed to kill one of the two Jem'Hadar on board Empok Nor in their plan to rescue Ishka, and also helped capture Yelgrun, the Vorta overseer.
Upon the successful conclusion of the mission, Leck commented to Quark, "This is the sloppiest, most amateurish operation I've ever seen... If you ever do something like this again, count me in." (DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi")
Later that year, Rom tried to contact him on Ferenginar, but couldn't reach him as the planetary com-system had collapsed. (DS9: "Profit and Lace")


== Memorable quotes ==
"I hope this is a secure channel?"
"I followed your instructions to the letter."
"Very good. Who do you want eliminated?"

- Leck and Quark (DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi")

"I don't care about latinum."

- Leck to Quark, much to his brother Rom's surprise. (DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi")

"I thought you said you didn't care about latinum!"
"I don't! I just don't like to be cheated!"

- Rom and Leck, after everyone finds out that Quark lied about the Nagus's reward. (DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi")

"How do we know these schematics are accurate?"
"Sir."
"No need to stand on formalities here - call me Leck."
"No, I meant you should call me 'sir.'"
"Don't be ridiculous."
"You mean 'don't be ridiculous, sir'"

- Leck and Nog, during prepation to rescue Iskha. (DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi")

"This is the eighth run-through and you haven't even hit a single Jem'Hadar. And you shot Moogie!"
"I could see that we weren't going to rescue her - so I put her out of her misery."

- Nog and Leck, during a training exercise to rescue Ishka. (DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi")

"I've never seen a sloppier, more amateurish operation in my life... If you ever do something like this again -- count me in!"

- Leck to Quark, upon rescuing Ishka. (DS9: "The Magnificent Ferengi")