When a Klingon fleet under General Martok arrives at the station ostensibly to protect the Alpha Quadrant from the Dominion, Sisko recruits Lieutenant Commander Worf to discover the Klingons' true intentions. (Season premiere)


== Summary ==


=== Teaser ===
The Deep Space 9 crew hunts a Changeling through the space station. Using wide-angle phaser sweeps, Captain Benjamin Sisko and Major Kira Nerys chase the Changeling to the Promenade, where it suddenly resumes humanoid shape and grabs hold of Doctor Julian Bashir after emerging from the Promenade directory. It is Odo, and the chase was really just a surprise drill. Kira asks the computer how much time it took to catch Odo; three hours and twenty-seven minutes is the answer. Odo laments that duration isn't good enough, noting how any other Founder would have had a field day with the station in that length of time, culminating in Bashir's death. The staff is then dismissed with a warning to scan anything and everything next time, given the other Founders' increased proclivity for shapeshifting. Another random drill is scheduled, and an offer from Quark to take bets on how long the staff will take to catch Odo is rebuffed.

That night, when Kasidy Yates joins Sisko for a romantic dinner, she remarks that there have been some changes on Deep Space 9. Firstly, Sisko has shaved his head, of which Yates approves. Secondly, there has been a lot of "maintenance" done on the station lately. Sisko is secretive, but hints that the crew is preparing a few "surprises" in case the Dominion decides to attack the station. The recent revelation that Changelings have infiltrated the Alpha Quadrant has caused a large amount of unrest, and the Cardassians have responded by sealing their borders. The couple present each other with gifts – Sisko gives Kasidy a garment made from rare Tholian silk, while Kasidy returns the gesture by handing Sisko a Pike City Pioneers baseball cap from Cestus III.
Their dinner is interrupted when the new Klingon flagship, the IKS Negh'Var, decloaks at the station. Its commander, General Martok, requests shore leave at Deep Space 9. After Sisko agrees, the DS9 crew is amazed when an entire armada of Klingon ships decloaks around the station.


=== Act One ===
In Quark's, the Ferengi bartender nervously opines with O'Brien and Bashir that the Klingons who have arrived are awfully quiet. When Martok meets with Captain Sisko and Major Kira, he immediately wants them to use his d'k tahg to cut their palms, proving that they bleed and therefore are not Changelings. When the Klingon is satisfied that Sisko and Kira are really who they appear to be, Martok explains that the Klingon fleet has been sent to fight alongside their Federation allies against the Dominion. Sisko appreciates the gesture but isn't sure it's necessary, as their communications relay in the Gamma Quadrant hasn't detected any signs of Jem'Hadar activity for quite some time, but Martok insists that the Dominion will come, and the Klingons will remain in Bajoran space to counter the inevitable attack.

The DS9 crew resumes regular duties, despite the fact that the station's complement now includes countless Klingons. Kira and Jadzia Dax visit the holosuite, which recreates the Hoobishan Baths on Trill. Kira is distracted away from the holograms and unimpressed with them, admitting that she has never had much of an imagination. At the Replimat, Odo and Garak have a quiet breakfast together, where a worried Garak reveals that, since the destruction of the Obsidian Order, he has heard rumors of civil uprisings on Cardassia. Their meal is interrupted when a group of Klingons accosts Morn on the Promenade. Odo breaks up the altercation, but the lead Klingon, Drex, levels threats at both Garak and Odo. Odo tells the group of Klingons to leave the Promenade or be thrown in a holding cell.
Drex and his thugs later ambush and beat Garak in his tailor shop.


=== Act Two ===
As Bashir repairs the Cardassian's broken bones, he states he is surprised that Garak isn't pressing charges. Garak, in his usual manner, brushes off the beating but is wondering why Klingons have become so hostile to Cardassians.

In Sisko's office, Kira reports that because Klingon ships keep cloaking and decloaking, it's impossible to get an exact count, but they've so far been able to identify at least twenty different warships in the vicinity of DS9. Just then, Dax picks up a priority one distress call from Kasidy Yates' freighter, the SS Xhosa. The ship is under attack, but her signal gets jammed before she can say who it is. Sisko and the crew board the USS Defiant, and after arriving at the Xhosa's coordinates, they discover that Commander Kaybok of the Klingon Bird-of-Prey IKS M'Char is searching all vessels exiting Bajoran space for Changelings, including the Xhosa. When Sisko threatens Kaybok that the Defiant will open fire on the M'Char, the Klingon commander allows the Xhosa to break free of the M'Char's tractor beam.
Once the senior officers return to Deep Space 9, Martok meets with Sisko again in his office, only to slam a d'k tahg onto Sisko's desk and leave. Dax explains that the dagger belongs to Kaybok and that Martok gave it to Sisko to let him know that he executed Kaybok as punishment for disobeying his orders. Sisko realizes that something must be done now before the situation escalates out of control.

Remembering how Curzon once told him that the only people who can really handle Klingons are other Klingons, Sisko notifies Starfleet Command of the situation, and Starfleet consequently dispatches Lieutenant Commander Worf to the station. Upon his arrival, Chief O'Brien welcomes his old crewmate aboard. A disgruntled Quark, however, upon seeing Worf, sarcastically remarks that precisely what the station needs is "another Klingon."


=== Act Three ===
Worf immediately goes to see Captain Sisko to introduce himself and report for duty. When Worf meets the captain, Sisko offers condolences for the loss of the USS Enterprise-D, calling it a good ship. Worf thanks Sisko for his condolences but is clearly uncomfortable discussing it. He confirms Sisko's understanding that he has been on extended leave at the Klingon monastery on Boreth. Sisko apologizes for interrupting Worf's leave, but Worf tells Sisko his leave was almost over. When Sisko asks where Worf will likely be assigned next, Worf admits he has been considering resigning from Starfleet. When asked why, Worf explains that living among Humans for most of his life has never been easy for him but that it has become even harder for him since the Enterprise was destroyed and that he is no longer sure of his place in Starfleet anymore. Sisko tells Worf that, if he doesn't want the assignment, he will understand, but Worf tells Sisko that, until he decides one way or the other about resigning, he is going to do his duty. With that, Sisko gives Worf his assignment: find out what the Klingons are up to. Before Worf leaves, Sisko cautions him that he too once considered resigning from Starfleet but now believes that would have been the wrong choice. He urges the Klingon to consider his decision carefully, and Worf promises the captain he will keep that in mind.

Worf ventures into Quark's, surprising the Ferengi by asking for prune juice over the traditional Klingon choice of bloodwine. Chief O'Brien asks his old shipmate to join him and introduces him to Doctor Bashir and darts. Worf's first try at the sport ends up with him throwing the dart halfway through the board. Then, Kira and Dax emerge from the holosuite, dressed in bright, colorful, and extravagant medieval clothes, arguing over the fact that Kira knocked out Sir Lancelot. O'Brien introduces Worf to the two, and while Kira is embarrassed and tries to explain the clothes, Dax is quite taken with him. Just then, Drex starts to stir up trouble, so Worf decides it's the perfect time to make his first attempt at finding out what the Klingons are up to. He picks a fight with Drex and takes the warrior's d'k tahg. Drex's father, who happens to be General Martok, comes to Worf's quarters to demand the return of his son's "honor." There, Worf voices his disappointment in Martok for the general's dishonorable tactics of harassing personnel and ships, but Martok vows that it is all in the Alpha Quadrant's best interests.
Afterwards, Worf vents his frustration on a tactical holosuite program. When Dax arrives, she challenges him to a battle with bat'leths. After a brief fight, Worf gains the upper hand and sweeps Dax off her feet. Dax rhetorically asks whether the simulation made Worf feel better. Worf is frustrated at the situation, noting that his contacts on the Klingon homeworld refuse to speak with him. Dax suggests that, with so many Klingons on the station, surely one of them owes the House of Mogh a favor and might be willing to reveal the true reason they are there.

Worf invites an old family friend, Klingon officer Huraga, for a drink. When they consume a large quantity of bloodwine and become drunk, Worf presses Huraga for information. Owing Worf's father, Mogh, as Mogh had saved Huraga's House during their feud with the House of Duras, Huraga tells Worf all about the "glorious battle" that awaits them ahead.
What Worf learns disturbs him, so much so that he hesitates to tell Sisko. Odo argues with Worf on the Promenade and tells the Klingon that no matter what choice he makes, it is his duty to inform Sisko which side he's on before it's too late.

Worf decides to tell Sisko the ominous truth – the Klingons are about to attack Cardassia. The rumors are true; the Central Command has been overthrown by civilian resistance, and power has been transferred to civilian authorities. The Klingons are convinced that Changeling infiltrators are responsible, although they have no hard proof. But they are convinced that civilians couldn't have done it without outside help.
In the wardroom, Sisko confronts Martok and demands that the Klingons call off their attack. Martok hints that Chancellor Gowron will be told of Worf's involvement in uncovering news of the planned attack. Worf himself feels guilty that he has essentially betrayed the Klingon Empire. When Sisko points out that Starfleet will never support an unprovoked invasion and that the attack will place the Federation-Klingon alliance in jeopardy, Martok claims he will return to his ship and consult with Gowron.
However, once Martok beams aboard his ship, he sends a message to the Klingon fleet, ordering them to begin their attack. The fleet cloaks and warps away from the station, heading straight for Cardassia Prime.


=== Act Four ===
The crew of DS9 meets in the wardroom. The Federation Council has ordered them not to get involved until they speak with Gowron, a decision supported by the Bajoran government. Bashir asks if they are going to warn the Cardassians of the invasion, but Dax points out that they would be betraying the Klingons by so doing. O'Brien wonders if the Klingons are correct and that the Dominion has indeed taken over the Cardassian government, to which Odo states this is how the Founders would set about gaining control of Cardassia. Kira states that the Obsidian Order's destruction gave the Cardassian dissident movement the strength and momentum it needed to take over the government without Dominion involvement. Worf points out that this is irrelevant – many Klingons in the Empire believe they have been at peace for too long and that the Empire must expand in order to survive. The looming Dominion threat has given them an excuse to attack and conquer. If the Klingons have returned to "the old ways" of conquest, Bajor, and potentially the Federation, are at risk, and the crew needs to do something to prevent that from happening.
Sisko tries an unorthodox tactic – he invites Garak into the wardroom to measure the Starfleet captain for a new suit. As Garak works, the crew makes sure the tailor overhears the fact that one-third of the Klingon military is currently heading into Cardassian space and will arrive within the hour. Garak excuses himself and immediately afterwards returns to his shop to warn Gul Dukat. Busy fighting the civilian insurgency, the Cardassian Union is unprepared for a possible Klingon invasion.

Later in Ops, Kira reports that the outlying Cardassian colonies were overrun almost immediately by the Klingons. But now that the Cardassian fleet has been mobilized, the Klingons are meeting stronger resistance. Dax jokingly says that it's almost as if somebody warned the Cardassians they were coming. Kira then says it'll hopefully make the Klingons think twice about what they're doing, but Worf says that's unlikely, as now that the battle has begun, Martok and his troops will settle for nothing less than victory. Just then, Sisko exits his office with bad news: the Federation Council has decided to officially condemn the invasion, and in response, Gowron has expelled all Federation citizens from the Klingon Empire and recalled his ambassadors from the Federation. Even worse, the Klingons have withdrawn from the Khitomer Accords. The Federation-Klingon alliance has been officially ended. Despite this, however, O'Brien reports a Klingon ship has decloaked and requests permission to dock, claiming to have Chancellor Gowron on board, who wishes to personally speak with Worf.

Aboard the Klingon ship, Gowron happily greets Worf and tells him that, despite everything, he still considers him a friend and ally. He then tells Worf why he is there; he wants him to leave Starfleet and join the Klingons in the battle, which will give him a chance to redeem himself in the eyes of his people.


=== Act Five ===
Despite wanting to return to his people and knowing that he owes the chancellor much for restoring his honor and giving Kurn a seat on the Klingon High Council, Worf refuses, telling Gowron that he will not break his oath to Starfleet, nor will he support an unwarranted attack. Enraged, Gowron warns Worf that, if he refuses, the House of Mogh will be stripped of all its assets, Kurn will be removed from the High Council, and Worf himself will be exiled from the Klingon Empire and left with nothing. When Worf replies he'll still have his honor, Gowron simply says, "So be it."
Later, Worf sits in Quark's, deep in thought, and is joined by O'Brien. After reminiscing over how they saved Captain Picard from the Borg and how Worf knew they would succeed despite the overwhelming odds, he says he has decided to resign. O'Brien tries to convince him otherwise, assuring Worf that Starfleet is sure to build another Enterprise soon, but as far as Worf is concerned, the ship and the life he knew are gone. As he cannot return to Boreth and feels that his son is much happier living on Earth, Worf decides to apply for a commission with a distant cruiser fleet in the Nyberrite Alliance. Believing he is a liability to Captain Sisko's dealing with the Klingons, he asks Sisko to accept his resignation, but Sisko refuses – Starfleet needs Worf now more than ever before. Indeed, word soon arrives that the Klingons have broken through the Cardassian fleet.

Sisko contacts the new Cardassian government, the Detapa Council, only to see the face of Dukat. Apparently, Dukat switched sides when it was clear that the coup would succeed. Sisko devises a plan: if Dukat can get the Council on a ship and rendezvous with the Defiant, they can seek refuge on Deep Space 9. Since the Klingons will execute all government officials in their invasion of Cardassia, Dukat agrees. Worf points out that – if Martok is correct, and members of the Detapa Council have been replaced by Changelings – then the Defiant will help them escape. Sisko considers it a risk worth taking. Knowing the Klingons may end up attacking the station, he orders the new weapons systems to be checked and a partial evacuation of the civilian population. On his way to the airlock, Sisko runs into Kasidy, who had just gotten back an hour ago. The two muse about how lousy their timing has been but share their first kiss.
Sisko, Dax, Bashir, and Worf take the cloaked Defiant toward the rendezvous point. Worf admits he feels strange being on a Federation starship with a cloaking device, but Sisko assures him he'll get used to it. Bashir reminds Sisko that their agreement with the Romulans regarding the cloaking device strictly forbids its use in the Alpha Quadrant. Sisko is aware of this but also knows there are probably countless Klingon ships between them and Dukat, and he wants to make it to the rendezvous in one piece. In response, Bashir tells Sisko he will not say anything to the Romulans if he doesn't, to which Sisko replies with a subtle wink.
Later, the Defiant comes across a debris field of Cardassian ships destroyed by the Klingon invaders. Although there may be survivors, the only way to find out is by decloaking the Defiant to use the main sensors. Worf advises against it, warning there are probably Klingon ships cloaked and lying in wait. When Bashir argues that that doesn't sound very honorable, Worf replies that, to Klingons, in war there is nothing more honorable than winning. Despite the chance of survivors and over Bashir's objection, Sisko knows making the rendezvous is more important and decides not to take the risk. When the Defiant arrives at the coordinates, they find three Klingon Birds-of-Prey are in the vicinity and are attacking the Cardassian cruiser Prakesh.


=== Act Six ===
When the Klingons ignore the Defiant's hails and fire the first shot, the starship targets the lead Bird-of-Prey and seriously damages its engines. With the Prakesh's shields, weapons, and engines obliterated, Sisko is left with no choice but to drop the Defiant's shields and transport Dukat and the Council off their impaired vessel, but he also decides to err on the side of caution and orders that they undergo blood screenings. Sisko gambles that the Defiant's ablative armor will be sufficient against the attacks from the Birds-of-Prey. The Defiant begins firing at will and destroys the second Klingon vessel in the process.

When a larger Vor'cha-class attack cruiser joins the melee, Worf uses his tactical experience and suggests the use of a modulated tractor beam to deflect some of the Klingon disruptor fire. The Defiant crew is successful in rescuing all the Detapa Council members, although the Defiant's cloaking device has been damaged. The Defiant flies to maximum warp as the Prakesh explodes, and two Klingon vessels follow the starship. Meanwhile, Doctor Bashir has examined all the Council members, including Dukat, and determined that no one aboard is a Changeling.
The Defiant successfully reaches Deep Space 9, where O'Brien detects the pursuing Klingon ships. As the Defiant approaches the station, the crew detects several dozen Klingon ships. O'Brien has requested reinforcements from Starfleet Command, but the relief task force, under command of Admiral Hastur, has not yet reached the station. Sisko makes the decision to sound battle stations.


=== Act Seven ===
The DS9 crew man their battle stations, preparing for the Klingons to attack, while civilians are evacuated into emergency shelters (including a reluctant Quark, who wanted to defend his bar with his disruptor pistol, only to find that Rom has cannibalized it for replicator repair). The Detapa Council are sequestered away by Dukat and, unexpectedly, Garak, who raises a Cardassian disruptor to fight alongside Dukat.
Martok and Gowron hail the station and offer an ultimatum – surrender the Cardassian officials, or the Klingons will take the Council members by force. Even when Sisko tells the two Klingons that the councilors have all been given blood screenings and confirmed to not be Changelings, Martok and Gowron remain determined to conquer Cardassia. Gowron urges Sisko to surrender, claiming the old station is as defenseless as a toothless old Grishnar cat. Sisko confidently retorts the "old cat" might not be as "toothless" as Gowron thinks: due to the Dominion threat, Deep Space 9 has been given some major tactical upgrades – the station is now equipped with more than 5,000 photon torpedoes ready to fire.
Nevertheless, Gowron dismisses the warning, declaring, in Klingon, Kahless' battle cry: "Today is a good day to die!" The Klingon fleet begins their attack.


=== Act Eight ===

When the Klingon fleet enters weapons range, DS9 unleashes several volleys of the station's new armaments. With multiple phaser banks and telescoping photon torpedo launchers, the station destroys ship after ship. Furious, Gowron orders the Negh'Var to fire its cannons directly at DS9's shield generators. The station's defensive systems fail, and Klingon boarding parties beam into Ops, the Promenade, and the Cardassians' quarters. After a series of firefights and fierce hand-to-hand combat, the DS9 crew manages to regain control of the situation. An injured O'Brien restores the shields, and Dax announces the arrival of the Starfleet reinforcements, six ships led by the USS Venture. Accepting that continuing the battle will lead to heavy losses on both sides and leave the Alpha Quadrant open to the Dominion, Gowron agrees to retreat and halt the invasion of Cardassian space. He parts with one final threat: "You have sided against us in battle. And this we do not forgive... or forget."

"Captain's log, Stardate 49011.4. Gowron has returned to the Klingon homeworld, and his task force has withdrawn from Bajoran space. I don't know if I can fully express the pride I felt at seeing how well Deep Space 9 and its crew weathered this latest crisis. While the station suffered heavy damage during the Klingon attack, repairs are well ahead of schedule, and life on the station is beginning to return to normal, leaving me with one final piece of unfinished business."
As the Klingons retreat and the Venture arrives, life on the station returns to normal. Quark reopens the bar, much to the delight of Morn, and Garak returns to his tailor shop. As Worf packs up his belongings, Sisko arrives with his discharge papers, wanting him to look them over before he sends them to Starfleet and makes his resignation official. Sisko tells Worf that he also considered leaving Starfleet after the death of his wife, believing that, once he took off the uniform, the pain would go away. But he soon realized that the pain would only end up catching up to him, and the only way he could beat it was to stand his ground and face it. In the end, he knows what he is and what he will always be – a Starfleet officer. Worf finally realizes that resigning from Starfleet won't help him move on from the destruction of the Enterprise and decides to stay in the service. Sisko offers to speak with the captain of the Venture to see if he has a position for him. Worf, however, instead requests a posting on Deep Space 9.

Worf later reports for duty in Ops, taking the post of strategic operations officer and wearing a red Starfleet uniform. The rest of the senior staff congratulate him on his new posting, as Worf confides to O'Brien that he looks forward to new challenges in the command division. Sisko reports that Dukat and the rest of the Detapa Council returned to Cardassia Prime safely and have sent thanks, although everyone knows Dukat will end up taking most of the credit. The news is not all good, however, as the Klingons are continuing to remain near DS9. They have refused to abandon several Cardassian colonies they seized and have started fortifying their positions. Sisko tells his crew that they also won't be backing down but will be staying right where they are – aboard Deep Space 9.


=== Log entries ===
Captain's log, Deep Space 9, 2372


== Memorable quotes ==
"I didn't know you spoke Klingon."
"Oh, you'd be surprised at the things you can learn when you're doing alterations."

- Odo and Garak, with a quip as the latter casually disregards his service in the Obsidian Order

"Ah, but I dealt them several cutting remarks which, no doubt, did severe damage to their egos."
"This isn't funny."
"I'm serious, Doctor. Thanks to your ministrations, I'm almost completely healed! But the damage I did to them will last a lifetime...."

- Garak and Julian Bashir, at the infirmary, after Garak is assaulted by Klingons in his shop

"The longer the Klingons are here, the worse things are going to get. Whatever you decide to do, you'd better do it soon."
"Curzon told me once that in the long run, the only people who can really handle the Klingons... are Klingons. Get me Starfleet Command."

- Jadzia Dax and Benjamin Sisko, before the latter requests Worf

"Commander Worf."
"Chief. It has been a long time."
"Too long. Welcome aboard."

- O'Brien and Worf, reuniting as Worf arrives on Deep Space 9

"Just what this station needs... another Klingon."

- Quark, upon seeing Worf

"I was sorry to hear about the Enterprise. She was a good ship."

- Benjamin Sisko, to Worf about the loss of the USS Enterprise-D

"Let me guess, Klingon bloodwine."
"Prune juice. Chilled."
(laughs) "Prune juice!" (stops laughing when Worf glares at him) "If you say so."

- Quark and Worf, upon their first meeting

"Nice hat."

- Worf, on first meeting Kira and Jadzia

"You forget, I am not only a Klingon warrior; I am a Starfleet officer, and Starfleet deserves an explanation!"
"They will get one soon enough. Until then, know this: my mission will determine the fate of the Klingon Empire. Interfere, and you risk destroying us all!"

- Worf and Martok

"Commander. I just wanted to say that I understand what you're going through. I've also had to choose between duty and loyalty to my people."
"Yes, I have read your Starfleet security file."
"Frankly, Mr. Worf, I don't care which choice you make. But you owe it to Captain Sisko to let him know which side you're on, before it's too late. Enjoy the view."

- Odo and Worf

"The Klingons? Why would the Klingons invade us?"
"According to my sources, the Klingon High Council believes that Cardassia has been taken over by the Founders."
"That's ridiculous."
"Is it?"
"Garak, you have got to talk to Sisko. Tell him he has to find some way to stop the Klingons. Cardassia has enough problems right now."
"You're having trouble keeping the civilians in line?"
"How do you know about that?"
"I'm afraid that since the fall of the Obsidian Order, Cardassian security isn't what it used to be."
"Yes. Shame about the Order. I suppose there won't be much demand for your services anymore. Looks like you'll be hemming women's dresses for the rest of your life."
"We can stand here all day reminding ourselves just how much we hate each other, but you don't have the time. The Klingon fleet will reach Cardassian territory in less than one hour. I suggest you prepare for them."

- Dukat and Garak, on the impending Klingon invasion of Cardassia

"Well, what did the Federation Council say?"
"They've decided to condemn the Klingon invasion. In response, Gowron has expelled all Federation citizens from the Klingon Empire and recalled his ambassadors from the Federation."
"You're saying he cut off diplomatic relations?"
"He's done more than that. The Klingons have withdrawn from the Khitomer Accords. The peace treaty between the Federation and the Klingon Empire has ended."

- O'Brien, Sisko, and Kira, on the destruction of the alliance between the Federation and the Klingon Empire

"Don't get killed."
"I'll do my best."

- Kassidy and Sisko, after sharing their first kiss together

"Sir, I hate to bring this up, but our agreement with the Romulans expressly prohibits use of the cloaking device in the Alpha Quadrant."
"You're right, it does. But there are hundreds of Klingon ships between us and Dukat, and I intend to make that rendezvous in one piece."
"Well, I won't tell the Romulans if you don't."
(Sisko winks)

- Bashir and Sisko

"Thank you, Doctor, but if you don't mind, I would like to go to the bridge now."
"This will only take a minute. Your arm, please."
"What is the meaning of this?"
"Just a simple blood screening."
"I assure you, doctor, I am not a Changeling."
"Then you have nothing to worry about."
"I find this whole procedure offensive."
"And I find you offensive. Now hold out your arm or I'll have a security officer do it for you."

- Dukat and Bashir

"Captain, would you kindly inform this security guard that he does not have to monitor my every move? It makes me feel unwelcome."
"Looks like I won, Benjamin. You owe me dinner."
"And what is that supposed to mean?"
"Captain Sisko bet me that you would thank him for the rescue before you started complaining."
"I lost."

- Dukat, Dax, and Sisko

"The Klingons?!? First it was the Cardassians... then it was the Dominion... now it's the Klingons! How's a Ferengi supposed to make an honest living in a place like this?"

- Quark, exasperated before the Klingon attack on DS9

"Doctor."
"Constable. What can I do for you?"
"I just want you to know I'll be assigning a security team to the infirmary for your protection."
"Well, thank you, but I'd rather you didn't. I'm going to have wounded people in here. The last thing I need is a team of deputies having a firefight in my doorway."
"I understand. Just do me a favor. Don't count on that blue uniform to protect you. In the heat of battle, Klingons aren't very choosy about their targets. Doctor or no doctor, you might end up having to defend yourself."
"Well, hopefully it won't come to that. But if it does, I promise you I'll be ready."
"That's all I ask."
"And while we're on the subject, constable, I'm sure there's more than one Klingon who thinks that slaying a Changeling would be worthy of a song or two."
"Doctor, if a Klingon were to kill me, I'd expect nothing less than an entire opera on the subject."
"Maybe. I just don't want to have to listen to it. Watch your back."

- Odo and Bashir

"Come on, Quark, move it along. You should be in the emergency shelter by now."
"I'm not going to any emergency shelter. This is my bar, and I'm going to defend it."
"Really? And how do you plan to do that?"
"With this."
"You're going to hit them with a box?"
"No. This is my disruptor pistol. The one I used to carry in the old days, when I was serving on that Ferengi freighter."
"I thought you were the ship's cook."
"That's right. And every member of that crew thought he was a food critic. If the Klingons try to get through these doors, I'll be ready for them."
(reads note in the empty box) "'Dear Quark, I used parts from your disruptor to fix the replicators. Will return them soon. Rom.'"
"I will kill him!"
"With what?"

- Odo and Quark

"That's close enough, Garak."
"I wanted to make sure that the council members were safe."
"Hoping, no doubt, that your concern would curry some political favor?"
"Oh, and I take it your concern is motivated strictly by patriotism."
"Oh, the council members are well aware of my patriotism. And the sacrifices I was willing to make in order to save them. Now, why don't you go back to your little tailor shop and sew something?"
"Because if the Klingons do invade this station, you may just need... my help. Who would have thought that the two of us would be fighting side by side?"
"Just remember when you fire that thing, you're aiming it at a Klingon."
"I'll try to keep that in mind."

- Dukat and Garak, before the upcoming battle

"I find this hand-to-hand combat really quite distasteful!"
"I suppose you prefer the simplicity of an interrogation chamber!"
"You have to admit, it's much more civilized!"

- Garak and Dukat, during the fight with the Klingons

"This is exactly what the Founders want: Klingon against Cardassian! Federation against Klingon! The more we fight each other, the weaker we'll get, and the less chance we have against the Dominion!"

- Benjamin Sisko

"Consider what you do here, Gowron. Kahless himself said, 'Destroying an empire to win a war is no victory...'"
"...and ending a battle to save an empire is no defeat."

- Worf and Gowron

"I do not intend to hand victory to the Dominion. But let your people know that the Klingon Empire will remember what has happened here. You have sided against us in battle, and this we do not forgive... or forget!"

- Gowron

"I finally realized that it wasn't Starfleet that I wanted to get away from: I was trying to escape the pain I felt after my wife's death. I thought I could take the uniform, wrap it around that pain, and toss them both away. But it doesn't work like that. Running may help, for a little while – but sooner or later the pain catches up with you, and the only way to get rid of it is to stand your ground and face it."

- Sisko

"Looks like the Klingons are here to stay."
"Maybe they are, but so are we."

- Kira and Sisko


== Background information ==
Season 4 introduced several changes to Star Trek: Deep Space Nine. These included a new title sequence, new credits, and promotions for several characters. For more information, please see DS9 Season 4.


=== Story and script ===
At the end of the third season, the writers had planned on doing a "Changelings on Earth" storyline, which would end on a cliffhanger. However, Paramount said that they didn't want a cliffhanger ending, forcing the writers to go in a different direction. This not only necessitated a rethinking of the end of the third season, but also a rethinking of the opening of the fourth. The "Changelings on Earth" two-parter was molded into the fourth season episodes "Homefront" and "Paradise Lost", while the rethinking of the end of Season 3 produced "The Adversary", a show which left things very open-ended as to how the series was to proceed. Falling ratings had led to the studio giving the producers a mandate to do "something" to shake up the series. Initially, there was some discussion about having the Vulcans leave the United Federation of Planets. However, Ira Steven Behr found himself returning to the episode "The Die is Cast", specifically a line spoken by one of the Founders; "After today, the only threat remaining to us from the Alpha Quadrant are the Klingons and the Federation. And I doubt either of them will be a threat for much longer." Behr discussed the line with Ronald D. Moore, who had written it. Behr commented to Moore, "Maybe we're making a mistake. Maybe the Vulcans should not be the ones leaving the Federation. Maybe it's the Klingons who should break off diplomatic relations. That might bring more heat to it." Behr then pitched a Klingon arc to Rick Berman, who loved the idea. Behr and Berman then brought up the idea to the producers, who liked it but wanted another element. In response, Berman suggested using the opportunity to bring in the popular Worf as a main character. (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion, pp. 250 & 255-256; Captains' Logs Supplemental - The Unauthorized Guide to the New Trek Voyages, p. 100) Stated Behr, "We thought bringing in Worf would be a good idea because it would bring all the fans who miss the Klingons." (Star Trek - Where No One Has Gone Before, paperback ed., p. 200)
Ronald D. Moore reacted positively to the suggestion that the Klingon-Federation alliance be broken. "I thought it was a necessary step forward," he remarked. Though Moore thought the alliance was "cool and interesting" because it varied the Klingons from how they had been portrayed in Star Trek: The Original Series, he found the alliance was also restrictive and somewhat "defanged" the Klingons. As he saw it, only the internal politics and Worf family material could be depicted, rather than any sense of the Klingons as antagonists. "Ultimately, though, they're just great villains, worthy adversaries and very interesting. I think that's why we brought them back that way," Moore concluded. (Captains' Logs Supplemental - The Unauthorized Guide to the New Trek Voyages, p. 101)
Robert Hewitt Wolfe was somewhat concerned how this episode would incorporate the Worf character into Deep Space Nine. "It was a really a situation of bringing Worf in, but not surrendering the show to a new character," he said. "When a lot of shows are in the process of bringing in a new character, there's always a danger of slighting the characters that are already established [....] My biggest concern about bringing on Worf, wasn't so much servicing Worf [....] My concern was protecting what we had done in the previous seasons." ("Flashback: The Way of the Warrior", Star Trek Magazine issue 127)
Upon introducing Worf onto DS9 in this episode, the writing staff chose to elaborate on his backstory. "The character dynamic that we went for is that, basically, following the destruction of the Enterprise, his home was destroyed," recalled Ronald D. Moore. (Captains' Logs Supplemental - The Unauthorized Guide to the New Trek Voyages, p. 100)
Michael Dorn summarized this episode by saying, "The Klingons had finally gone nuts, basically." (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion, p. 259)
The scene between Garak and Quark in which they discuss root beer was one of several scenes that were added late in production because the episode was coming up a few minutes short. Ira Steven Behr said of the scene, "It was never meant as a joke. It was two aliens giving their individual viewpoints about what it was like to live under the Federation. They have serious problems with the whole Federation philosophy, and the fact that it's such a behemoth organization. But at the same time... even though they question the giant, they want the giant on their side when they're in trouble." (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion, p. 261)
A scripted portion of the scene between Kira and O'Brien where they discuss upgrades to the station saw O'Brien reveal that he and Bashir were occasionally participating in a holosuite program based on the Battle of Britain. In the scene extension, Kira sought O'Brien's advice on how to enjoy the holosuite programs, referring to an earlier scene with Kira and Dax, where Kira expresses unease in the holographic Hoobishan Baths. (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion - A Series Guide and Script Library)


=== Cast and characters ===
Michael Dorn approved of how the Klingons are portrayed in this episode, observing that it made the Klingons what they had originally been created to be, by turning them into antagonists again. (Star Trek - Where No One Has Gone Before, paperback ed., p. 201)
As he had worked with many members of the production crew on TNG, Dorn found adapting to his new working conditions was fairly straightforward. "It was actually comfortable and familiar. But just below the surface it was tense for me," he admitted, "and the combination of emotions was pretty interesting." (Star Trek - Where No One Has Gone Before, paperback ed., p. 201)
Michael Dorn liked how Worf is characterized in this episode. "With the destruction of the Enterprise, Worf's world is gone. That's an interesting acting choice for any actor," he commented. "You've got to play a guy who's just lost. Before, he had his comrades around him, at least he was on the best ship in the galaxy, and he had the opportunity to fight and be honorable. But DS9 is like a station in Alaska or something. He doesn't consider it a punishment, but it's not the choicest assignment, either. I think he brings a lot of different things we definitely haven't seen yet. It's all very exciting." (Captains' Logs Supplemental - The Unauthorized Guide to the New Trek Voyages, pp. 100-101)
Alexander Siddig commented, "That was a landmark for [...] the actors, because we met Michael Dorn for the first time on our show. We all got a chance to work with Michael on that one, which was great fun. Once we got going with Worf being there and settled down to doing it, we realized it wasn't going to be such a nightmare and that everything was probably going to be terrific. We all enjoyed that one and I particularly liked Chief O'Brien's line about his liking the look of Worf in red. It was such an unusual line and made me think that maybe O'Brien has a new sartorial eye that we never noticed before." (The Official Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Magazine issue 15, p. 24)
Cirroc Lofton (Jake Sisko) does not appear in this episode, though he is mentioned by Kasidy when he told her that Sisko was about to leave on a mission. This is the only season premiere from which he is absent.


=== Production ===
The first day of production on this episode was Tuesday 11 July 1995. On that day, the cast and crew, now including Michael Dorn, reported to work to begin filming the episode. (Star Trek - Where No One Has Gone Before, paperback ed., p. 201)
James L. Conway directed this episode while he was in the running to direct the next Star Trek film, Star Trek: First Contact. He commented, "I knew that I'd be up for the movie and be pitched to (then-Paramount boss) Sherry Lansing. So, for me, that two-hour episode was sort of an audition [....] It was very intimidating. But in my mind I had to prove to Rick Berman and Sherry that I could do this. So I put everything I possibly could into 'Way of the Warrior'. It was a two-hour, sixteen days, two eight-day weeks." [1]
When it came time to film the root beer scene towards the end of the production schedule, Armin Shimerman and Andrew Robinson wanted to play the scene with an obvious layer of subtext, but James L. Conway felt it should be played exclusively for laughs. In the end, Ira Steven Behr came down on the subtext side of the debate. (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion, p. 261) Shimerman had to fight to play the scene the way he wanted. He commented, "it's of great satisfaction to me that it's one of the most popular scene from Deep Space Nine because it would have been a totally different scene had we done it the way it was written." [2]
Stunt Coordinator Dennis Madalone enjoyed filming the battle scenes between the crew in Ops and the Klingon boarding parties. Madalone commented, "That was one of my most enjoyable fights because on one side of the room Michael Dorn was taking out two or three guys, and Nana Visitor was taking out a couple of Klingons, and being stabbed [....] She really sold that whole plate. I remember Dax taking out a whole bunch of Klingons. The director gave me free rein to create and make things look busy." ("Flashback: The Way of the Warrior", Star Trek Magazine issue 127)
The holographic skull fighter in the holosuite was originally played by Dennis Madalone. He took a hit in his eye in the fight scene with Michael Dorn, and stunt actor Tom Morga took over for Madalone, so both stuntmen are present in the final aired version of the fight scene. (Information provided by Dennis Madalone)
On 19 July 1995, A-camera filmed at least one take of a scene featuring Dennis Madalone as a Bajoran security deputy on the upper level of the Promenade, firing his phaser twice and then falling backwards. (What We Left Behind)
In the fight scenes between the Klingons and the DS9 crew, only a few stuntmen appeared. They were "re-used" and most of them were shot twice or three times and appeared in the next scene in a different place. (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion, p. 263)
In one scene, a security officer played by stunt actress Leslie Hoffman answers, "Thanks." The voice was added in postproduction, using a different voice than Hoffman's. (Information provided by Leslie Hoffman)


=== Visual effects ===

As his first task on Deep Space Nine, illustrator John Eaves, who was hired during the hiatus between seasons three and four, was assigned to design several new Klingon ships which were intended to first be depicted in this episode. Eaves drew a number of concepts, based upon existing models, but with numerous surface alterations. Ultimately, however, none of his proposed designs were included in the episode, as, due to budgetary constraints, the producers decided to use regular Klingon ships for the battle scenes instead (apart from the IKS Negh'Var, which, originally intended for a one-time-only appearance in TNG: "All Good Things...", was hurriedly brought back from the opening leg of a touring display, Star Trek: The Exhibition, in Scotland). (Deep Space Nine Sketchbook: John Eaves, DS9 Season 4 DVD special features) John Eaves' work on this episode was not in vain, as his discarded Klingon ship design later served as the basis for the 22nd century Klingon Bird-of-Prey in the series Star Trek: Enterprise. [3][4]
Both Gary Hutzel and Glenn Neufeld were assigned to this episode as co-visual effects supervisors. Usually, they did alternating episodes, but due to the level of effects needed for this show, it was felt that the talents of both men were required. (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion, p. 263)
During the battle sequences between the Federation and Klingon fleets, the effects department used Playmates toys, Ertl model kits and Hallmark Bird-of-Prey Christmas ornaments in the background, in an effort to keep production costs down. When one of the toy ships was required to explode, special effects manager Gary Monak filled it with explosives and party glitter. (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion, pp. 263-265)


=== Episode cuts ===
This season premiere was initially aired as a single, two-hour-long, feature-length episode, the second of three examples of its kind in the series, the first being "Emissary" and the third being "What You Leave Behind". In repeat showings, however, the episode was edited into two one-hour parts. The following scenes were cut for time:
Dax and Kira in the baths holoprogram
Bashir and O'Brien eating sand peas at Quark's, while Quark mentions the quiet Klingons
Odo and Quark discussing Quark's intention to defend his bar and the discovery of the missing disruptor pistol
According to Ronald D. Moore, when the show was finished, it was actually too long, and there was some discussion about whether to cut the root beer scene, but Moore fought for it to remain. However, the scene was almost cut again when the episode was cut into two parts for syndication. (Captains' Logs: The Unauthorized Complete Trek Voyages, p. 105)


=== Reception ===
James L. Conway was proud of this episode. "It turned out spectacular," he enthused, "and that gave me confidence to go in and give a whole long pitch about how I'd do the movie [....] And [the installment] turned out great. So, for me, it was a lot of fun for a lot of reasons." [5]
Robert Hewitt Wolfe enjoyed the action of this episode, which he noted "appeals to the thirteen-year-old boy in all of us." But he thought the episode had achieved much more than this. He commented, "What makes me proud about this episode is that we managed to find the time to do something nice for every character on the series. Everybody got a moment or two that was very true to their characters; that was fun and exciting, and we used it as a chance to showcase all of our characters, not just introduce a new one." (Captains' Logs: The Unauthorized Complete Trek Voyages, p. 105) Wolfe elaborated on his comments, "I thought it was a very satisfying story. I thought it was attention grabbing. I hope it served its purpose in bringing back some of the TNG fans to the show, to make its case that DS9 was something really special. That it really deserved attention. I thought it did a great job. More to the point, it didn't ignore our already rich, established characters to do that. Every character in there had a great moment – an action sequence or a couple of action moments of their own, so we didn't just make it a Worf show [....] I was happy that DS9 didn't become the Worf show. We just had this great new element in addition to all the other great characters [....] 'Way of the Warrior' did that, bringing in a new, great character to our family without throwing out all the wonderful things that had been done up to that point." ("Flashback: The Way of the Warrior", Star Trek Magazine issue 127)
Ira Steven Behr similarly noted, "I thought it was a real strong opening to the season. It had all the typical Deep Space Nine elements: It had action, comedy, relationships, and it was actually kind of fun." Behr also was impressed by the direction of Jim Conway. He noted, "I thought the scene at the end between Sisko and Worf was as finely an enacted scene as you're going to find in the franchise. I would point to that scene for anyone who has any doubts about Sisko. I thought he was strong, understanding and told it like it was. I was very proud of that scene and I'm proud of that episode." (Captains' Logs: The Unauthorized Complete Trek Voyages, p. 105)
The reason Ronald D. Moore fought for the root beer scene to remain in this episode was that it was his favorite scene in the entire installment. He noted, "A great scene. Andy and Armin played it so well, and it's one of the stand-out moments of the season, if not the series. That's always what DS9 is good at, these characters." (Captains' Logs: The Unauthorized Complete Trek Voyages, p. 105) Moore also believed that Sisko's new appearance (which debuted in this episode) added a great deal to the scene where Sisko is in the wardroom with Worf and Martok. "It's a tense scene, and they're looking at each other but you get the impression that Avery is the guy in the room you've got to worry about. Sisko, suddenly, is the most threatening presence and the guy who is just going to kick your ass. There are two Klingons with him, and he's just blowing them away. I think it's really given him an edgy presence, which is great." (Captains' Logs: The Unauthorized Complete Trek Voyages, p. 102) Moore also admitted that he wasn't excited about bringing the Klingons into the DS9 TV series as a regular adversary. (What We Left Behind)
This episode's initial airing took place after the news was leaked that Michael Dorn would be reprising his role of Lieutenant Commander Worf on DS9. (Captains' Logs Supplemental - The Unauthorized Guide to the New Trek Voyages, p. 100)
Alexander Siddig noted that, due to this episode introducing Worf into the DS9 series, this episode was "a landmark for the fans." (The Official Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Magazine issue 15, p. 24) However, there was reportedly some concern from fans that dissolving the Federation-Klingon alliance, causing the two sides to resume their former militaristic stances, would directly breach what was widely considered to be one of Gene Roddenberry's personal accomplishments in creating Star Trek: The Next Generation. Ronald D. Moore and Robert Hewitt Wolfe later objected to this notion, Wolfe stating, "I wouldn't call the idea retro Star Trek." (Captains' Logs Supplemental - The Unauthorized Guide to the New Trek Voyages, p. 101)
Author Una McCormack commented, "I started watching with 'The Way of the Warrior', and I think that's quite a good place to come into DS9; it's a very slick episode, the show has a new surety of touch. You feel immediately immersed in this quite detailed and rich milieu [...] so I felt that I was watching a well-imagined show with plenty going on that I could learn about and discover. It didn't feel cardboard, it felt as if it had depth." [6]
Writer Christopher Priest thought that this episode was the start of Worf being a much more interesting character than he was on TNG. [7]
This episode was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Special Visual Effects.
In Star Trek 101 (p. 125), Terry J. Erdmann and Paula M. Block list "The Way of the Warrior" as being one of the "Ten Essential Episodes" from Star Trek: Deep Space Nine.
Cinefantastique ranked "The Way of the Warrior" as the second-best episode of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine. (Cinefantastique, Vol. 32, No. 4/5, p. 97)
Erika Lippoldt commented: "The reintroduction of a core TNG cast-member as a regular on another series could have felt cheap or forced—but fortunately for us, it turned out to be a wonderfully executed season premiere. The continued exploration of Worf's identity struggle between Klingon and Starfleet, his integration into the ensemble of this show—while doing them justice as well—and the cool action made for an extremely satisfying episode". [8]


=== Continuity ===
This is the first episode where Sisko is bald, a look that he maintained for the remainder of the series.
Sisko waits to have the weapons array activated until the Klingons have already attacked, then orders the weapons to be fired in volleys, beginning with even-numbered photon launchers, then odd-numbered ones, then phasers. At that point he tries to hail Gowron; hoping that the display of the station's firepower and the destruction of several Klingon ships will be enough to get them to call off the attack, but the Klingons ignore their hail. Only then does he finally order all weapons to fire at will. In "Call to Arms", when faced with similarly massive assault on the station, it is shown that Sisko uses a very different strategy to defend against the Dominion (the weapons array is already activated when the Dominion attacks, and he orders all weapons to fire immediately) presumably because – unlike with the Klingons – he isn't harboring hope of resolving the battle with any kind of diplomacy.
In this episode, while on the bridge of the Defiant, Worf comments that he has never been on a Federation ship with a cloaking device. However, in TNG: "The Pegasus", he was aboard the Enterprise-D as it engaged an experimental cloaking device.


==== References to other episodes ====
This episode contains many references to other episodes of Deep Space Nine as well as Star Trek: The Next Generation:
This episode follows on from the revelation, in the third season finale "The Adversary", that the Founders had infiltrated the Alpha Quadrant.
Garak and Odo having breakfast together is something that Odo suggested they should do in the third season episode "The Die is Cast".
There are numerous references to the destruction of the Obsidian Order. The Order was destroyed in the Battle of the Omarion Nebula, which also occurred in the third season episode "The Die is Cast".
Sisko's reference to having once considered resigning from Starfleet is a callback to DS9's pilot episode, "Emissary".
Sisko's claim that the communications array in the Gamma Quadrant hasn't detected any Dominion ship movements near the wormhole is a reference to the third season episode "Destiny", in which the communications array is deployed.
It is later revealed in "Apocalypse Rising" and further elaborated in "In Purgatory's Shadow" that Martok was a Changeling during the time that this episode is set. However, Martok cuts his hand early in this episode and it clearly bleeds; which would usually indicate that the person isn't a Changeling. This suggests that the Changelings had found a way around the test. This is likely when one considers that this is a popular ritual for Klingons and the possibility of Changeling infiltration would only stand to encourage the practice; hence, to ensure infiltration, the Changelings would absolutely have to find a way around it. In fact, in the episode "Homefront" - when the Federation implements similar screenings on Earth – Sisko's father is able to suggest, off the top of his head, a method by which this could be easily accomplished by a resourceful Changeling: draining a ‘solid’ of their blood, shapeshifting into their form, disposing of the body, and then letting the blood whenever required for a blood screening.
When Bashir points out to Sisko that they aren't supposed to be using the cloaking device in the Alpha Quadrant, it is a reference to the episodes "The Search, Part I" (when the Defiant’s Romulan cloaking device was introduced) and "Defiant" (when the rule about not using it in the Alpha Quadrant was revealed).
The animosity between Garak and Dukat, which is seen several times throughout the episode, was first alluded to in the second season episode "Cardassians" and then again in the third season episode "Civil Defense".
The Cardassian Dissident Movement which takes over control of Cardassia Prime from the Central Command was first introduced in the second season episode "Profit and Loss", and was shown to be gathering momentum in the third-season episode "Second Skin".
When the Klingons scan Deep Space 9 after Sisko refuses to turn over the Detapa Council, the weapons that Starfleet had installed are dismissed by General Martok as "duranium shadows and thoron fields" in reference to DS9: "Emissary", where Kira and O'Brien used duranium shadows and thoron fields to mask the lack of weapons on the station from several Cardassian ships.
Quark mentions that his cousin Gaila sells weapons. This forms the basis of the fifth season episode "Business as Usual", where Gaila (played by Josh Pais) appears. Gaila also appears in the Season 6 episode "The Magnificent Ferengi".
In a scene at Quark's Bar, Worf begins a fight with Drex - son of General Martok – by striking Drex with the back of his hand. In "Apocalypse Rising", Worf explains that striking a Klingon with the back of your hand is a challenge to a fight to the death.
O'Brien and Worf's conversation about saving Jean-Luc Picard from the Borg is a reference to TNG: "The Best of Both Worlds, Part II".
During the conversation between Worf and O'Brien at Quark's, the latter mentions the holodecks not working right; this is a reference to the episodes "The Big Goodbye" and "Elementary, Dear Data". Two other "holodeck havoc" episodes were "Ship In A Bottle" and "Emergence", neither of which Chief O'Brien was present for.
The various mentions of the destruction of the USS Enterprise-D refer to the film Star Trek Generations.
Chancellor Gowron's restoration of Worf's family honor took place in the TNG episode "Redemption II".
Quark comments that Worf only drinks prune juice, a reference to "Yesterday's Enterprise".
Worf's claim to Dax that he has even tried to contact Emperor Kahless is a reference to the TNG episode "Rightful Heir", in which a clone of the historical Kahless is installed as a kind of spiritual advisor for the Klingon populace.
Worf previously visited Deep Space 9 in TNG: "Birthright, Part I".
The Klingon drinking song established herein can also be heard in two Star Trek: Voyager episodes: The Doctor and Seven of Nine sing it in "Barge of the Dead", and Neelix sings the song's first two lines in "Prophecy".
Sisko's line of dialogue in this episode about the Defiant, "Looks like we're going to find out just how much of a pounding this ship can take," was later paid homage to in ENT: "Twilight". In that episode, Charles Tucker III – commanding officer of Enterprise NX-01 in an alternate timeline – states, "I think we're going to find out how much of a beating these new shields can take." ("Twilight" audio commentary, ENT Season 3 Blu-ray special features)


==== Costumes and props ====
This episode marks the first appearance of Worf's mek'leth, his personal bladed weapon (something Michael Dorn had specifically requested upon joining the series). It reappears in several future episodes as well as Star Trek: First Contact.
This marks the final time when Worf wears the "TNG-style" uniform, which had started with "Evolution" and the final time when he wears "operations gold", which had started with "The Child". At the end of the episode, he switches to the "DS9-style" uniform, which he continued to wear all the way through the fifth season episode "The Ascent" and wears "command red" for the first time since "The Neutral Zone". Worf previously wore a red command division uniform through the first season of The Next Generation while he served as a junior command officer, but he switched to gold and the operations division when he became head of security on the Enterprise in the second season. Near the end of this episode, Worf transfers back to the command division, becomes DS9's new strategic operations officer and the Defiant's executive officer, and again dons a red uniform.
The new TR-590 Medical Tricorder X appears for the first time in this episode, after the new regular tricorder had already been introduced in VOY: "Initiations".


=== Klingon translations ===
The script of this episode provides the following translations:
Drex's insult to Odo: "Does your mother let you talk to adult men?"
Martok, delivering Kaybok's d'k tahg to Sisko: "For you."
Dax's quip to Worf: "Yeah, but I'm a lot better looking than he was."
Huraga's drinking song file info: "And the blood was ankle deep / And the River Skral ran crimson red / On the day above all days / When Kahless slew evil Molor dead."
Martok and Gowron, in battle: "They fight like Klingons!" "Then they can die like Klingons! Destroy their shields! Prepare boarding parties!" "I understand. All ships, concentrate fire on their shield generators."
Gowron, right before the battle: "Today is a good day to die," as explicitly translated by Worf. Note, however, that this is slightly different from previous Klingon versions of the phrase, which are usually stated as "Heghlu'meH QaQ jajvam", instead of "CHEGH-chew jaj-VAM jaj-KAK!" as in this episode.
Martok, near the end of battle: "But Gowron, victory is near."


=== Other ===

This episode is the first of only three feature-length episodes in the Star Trek series that are not series pilots or finales. The other two are both installments of Star Trek: Voyager: namely, "Dark Frontier" and "Flesh and Blood".

This episode is dedicated to the memory of Gregg Duffy Long and Ronald W. Smith.
A special piece of promotional artwork (pictured) was created to advertise the episode in the UK. The artwork was used as the cover of the CIC Video VHS release, in addition to advertisements for the new season.
Although it was merely scripted for this episode and wasn't ultimately included in the final version of this installment, the notion that Bashir and O'Brien were occasionally participating in a holosuite program based on the Battle of Britain was later officially mentioned in "Homefront". (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion - A Series Guide and Script Library)
The footage of the USS Venture and other starships docked and traveling past Deep Space 9 was subsequently reused in "Doctor Bashir, I Presume" and "Sacrifice of Angels".
Among the items from this episode which were sold off on the It's A Wrap! sale and auction on eBay was one of the swimming trunks worn by one of the holographic Trill. The trunks were later re-used and worn by background actor David Polk in the VOY episode "Inside Man". [9](X)


=== Apocrypha ===
This episode was adapted by Diane Carey in the novelization The Way of the Warrior. In that book, the story point about Martok dismissing DS9's weapons as "duranium shadows and thoron fields" was expanded upon by having the Klingon attack on Garak serve the additional purpose of acquiring information on the station's defenses, but Garak, having guessed their plans, had deliberately provoked them into going after him and had subsequently provided them with out-of-date information on the station to lull them into a false sense of security.
At one point in this episode, Martok says to Sisko and Kira, "The blood will tell." In 2007, the comic book series Star Trek: Klingons - Blood Will Tell was released.
The Star Trek: The Lost Era novel The Art of the Impossible depicts the Betreka Nebula Incident, which began an eighteen-year conflict between the Klingon Empire and the Cardassian Union. In the novel, the conflict takes place from 2328 to 2346.


=== Remastered version ===
Remastered scenes from "The Way of the Warrior" are featured in the documentary What We Left Behind.


=== Video and DVD releases ===
UK VHS release (two-episode tapes, CIC Video): Volume 4.1, catalog number VHR 4203, 26 February 1996
This volume features a special case sleeve – a gatefold showcasing the promotional art for the episode, as well as background covering the events between series, such as the closing of the Cardassian borders, and increased belligerence on the part of the Klingons.
As part of the US VHS collection Star Trek - The Greatest Battles: 3 April 1997
As part of the UK VHS collection Star Trek - Greatest Battles: 16 November 1998
As part of the DS9 Season 4 DVD collection
As part of the Star Trek: Fan Collective - Klingon collection


== Links and references ==


=== Starring ===
Avery Brooks as Captain Sisko


=== Also starring ===
Rene Auberjonois as Odo
Michael Dorn as Lt. Commander Worf
Terry Farrell as Lt. Commander Dax
Cirroc Lofton as Jake Sisko
Colm Meaney as Chief O'Brien
Armin Shimerman as Quark
Alexander Siddig as Doctor Bashir
Nana Visitor as Major Kira


=== Guest stars ===
Penny Johnson as "Kasidy Yates"
Marc Alaimo as "Gul Dukat"
Robert O'Reilly as Gowron
J.G. Hertzler as Martok
Obi Ndefo as Drex
Christopher Darga as Kaybok
William Dennis Hunt as Huraga


=== Special guest star ===
Andrew Robinson as "Garak"


=== Co-stars ===
Patricia Tallman as Weapons Officer
Judi Durand as Computer Voice


=== Uncredited co-stars ===
Sam Alejan as Starfleet sciences officer
Michael Bailous as Klingon officer
Faye Barge as
Bajoran officer
Bajoran security deputy
Patrick Barnitt as Bajoran command officer
Scott Barry as
Bajoran command officer
Klingon officer
Ivor Bartels as Starfleet ops officer
Patti Begley as Bajoran command officer
Christina Bergstrom as Starfleet command officer
Ivy Borg as Rita Tannenbaum
Michael Braveheart as Klingon officer
Dan Carton as Klingon officer
Ken Clark as Klingon officer
George Colucci as Bajoran security deputy
Brian Demonbreun as Starfleet command/ops officer
Kathleen Demor as
Klingon officer
Starfleet ops lieutenant
Scott DeRoy as
Cardassian officer
Starfleet sciences officer
Juan De Villa as Bajoran civilian
Steve Diamond as Bajoran command officer
Chris Doyle as Klingon officer
Lee Faranda as Bajoran command officer
Jasmine Gagnier as Starfleet ops officer
Anthony Giger as Starfleet command officer
Natalie Graziano as Bajoran nurse
Terry Green as Starfleet ops lieutenant
Charles Grisham as Starfleet ops officer
Ken Gruz as Klingon officer
Leslie Hoffman as Starfleet ops ensign
Randy James as Jones
Julious Keys as Klingon officer
Mark Lentry as Starfleet command lieutenant
Ken Lesco as Klingon officer
David B. Levinson as Broik
Irving Lewis as Klingon officer
Shauna Lewis as Starfleet ops officer
Dennis Madalone as
Bajoran security deputy
Holographic skull-faced opponent
Klingon officer
Starfleet operations officer
Johnny Martin as
Bajoran officer
Bertram
Mary Mascari as Bajoran woman
Mary Meinel-Newport as Bolian woman
Bill Thomas Miller as
Bajoran security deputy
Human civilian
James Minor as Starfleet ops officer
Tom Morga as
Holographic skull-faced opponent
Klingon officer
Rudy Morrison as Bajoran civilian
Robin Morselli as Bajoran command officer
Sam Murdzak as Starfleet ops officer
Stuart Nixon as Starfleet command lieutenant
Dan Rose as Bajoran ops officer
Paul Sandman as Klingon officer
Michael J. Sarna as Klingon officer
Fran Severini as Detapa Council member
Chuck Shanks as Starfleet ops lieutenant
Mark Allen Shepherd as Morn
James Lee Stanley as Bajoran security deputy
Scott Strozier as
Bajoran security deputy
Malko
Katy Summerland as civilian
Unknown performers as
Alexander Rozhenko (picture only)
Bajoran male civilian
Bajoran monk
Bajoran ops officer
Bajoran security deputy
Bajoran security deputy
Bajoran security deputy
Bajoran security deputy (stunt)
Dabo girl
Defiant transporter officer (voice)
Female Bajoran civilian
Female Bajoran ops officer
Female Starfleet ops officer
Female Starfleet sciences officer
Female Starfleet sciences officer
Holographic Trill
Human Starfleet sciences officer
Klingon officer #5 (stunt)
Kobheerian
Male Starfleet command officer
Markalian
Nine Klingon officers
Pakled
Paradan
Pelian
Prakesh bridge officer
Pregnant Human civilian
Six Detapa Council members
Taal


==== Unconfirmed ====
Andrew DePalma as Klingon officer
Sandy E. Scott as Klingon officer


=== Stunt doubles ===
Ted Barba as stunt double for Marc Alaimo
John Lendale Bennett as stunt double for Obi Ndefo
B.J. Davis as stunt double for Andrew Robinson
Brennan Dyson as stunt double for Michael Dorn
J. Suzanne Rampe as stunt double for Terry Farrell


=== Photo doubles ===
Unknown actor – photo double for Andrew Robinson
Unknown actor – photo and hand double for J.G. Hertzler
Unknown actress – photo and hand double for Nana Visitor


=== Stand-ins ===
Ivor Bartels – stand-in
John Lendale Bennett – stand-in for Avery Brooks
Randy James – stand-in for Colm Meaney
Mark Lentry – stand-in for Marc Alaimo
James Minor – stand-in for Michael Dorn
Robin Morselli – stand-in
Dottie Sinclair – stand-in for Nana Visitor


=== References ===
2352; ablative armor; Alpha Quadrant; attack formation; attack pattern omega; bat'leth; Battle of Veridian III; Bajor; Bajoran; Bajoran Intelligence; Bajoran law; Bajoran Militia uniform; Bajoran government; Bajoran space (Bajoran territory); Bajoran wormhole; battle stations; bearing; Betreka Nebula; Betreka Nebula Incident; bird; blood screening; bloodwine; blunt force trauma; boarding party; Bolian; Boreth; Borg; broken; bones; buyer; Camelot; candle; Cardassia; Cardassia Prime; Cardassian; Cardassian desktop monitor; Cardassian dissident movement; Cardassian Central Command; Cardassian Empire; Cardassian government; Cardassian Military; Cardassian space (Cardassian territory); Cestus III; chief military advisor; clavicle; cloaking device; coffee; color; Constable; council member; coup; cup; "curry favor"; d'blok; d'k tahg; Daedalus-class; darts; Dax, Curzon; decibel; Deep Space 9; Deep Space 9 levels; Defiant class decks; Detapa Council; discharge papers; disruptor pistol; distress signal; Dominion; Dominion cold war; dozen; duranium; duranium shadow; earmuffs; Earth; emergency shelter; Enterprise-D, USS; ETA; evasive maneuvers; Excel, USS; Excelsior-class (unnamed); Federation; Federation Council; Federation-Klingon War; Ferengi; Ferengi freighter; Ferengi freighter crew; Ferengi language; food critic; Founders; Gaila; Gaila's moon; Galaxy-class; Galor-class (Galor debris); Gamma Quadrant; Garak's Clothiers; gesture; government official; Gowron's ship; Gramilian sand pea; Grishnar cat; ground forces; hand-to-hand combat; Hastur; hemming; holding cell; Hoobishan Baths; Horizon, USS; House of Duras; House of Martok; House of Mogh; holosuite; imagination; Imperial Overseer; interrogation chamber; International Space Station; Ionite Nebula; Jem'Hadar; Kahless the Unforgettable; Kahless (clone); kanar; Khitomer Accords; kiss; Klingons; Klingon-Cardassian War; Klingon drinking song; Klingon Bird-of-Prey (task force ship 1, task force ship 2, task force ship 3); Klingon Empire; Klingon High Council; Klingon military; Klingonese; K't'inga-class (Klingon warships); Kurn; laceration; Lancelot; lap dog; lead ship; Leeds, USS; lie; liquid; long range sensor scan; Lurian; M'Char, IKS; masseur; meter; Miranda-class; Mogh; Molor; monastery; "music to my ears"; Nebula-class; Negh'Var, IKS; Negh'Var warship; neutral space (unclaimed space); Nyberrite Alliance; Nyberrite Alliance cruiser; "Old Man"; Obsidian Order; odd number; orbital defense system; patriotism; people person; Phaser sweep; photon launcher; Picard, Jean-Luc; Pike City Pioneers; plot; poker; Prakesh; primary sensor array; priority 1 distress call; priority one message; Promenade; prune juice; puppet; Qo'noS; quantum torpedo; Quark's; red; red alert; replicator; Replimat; rib; River Skral; Rom; Romulan; root beer; Rozhenko, Alexander; Rozhenko, Helena; Rozhenko, Sergey; saltah'na clock; Sanders; security officer (security guard); search and seizure; sensor array; shield generator; ship's cook; shore leave; Sisko, Jennifer; Sisko, Joseph; situation report; standard maneuvers; Starfleet; Starfleet Command; Starfleet Intelligence; Starfleet uniform; stomach; strategic operations officer; subspace disturbance; Taal; tailor's kit; task force; team leader; Terok Nor-type; Tholian; Tholian ambassador; Tholian silk; Thoron; thoron field; tractor beam; transporter bay; Treaty of Alliance; Trial, USS; Trill (planet); Trill (species); vector; Venture, USS; Venture captain; Vitarian wool; Vor'cha-class (Klingon attack cruiser, Klingon warships, ...more warships); waist; "wide berth"; wormhole relay station; Xhosa, SS; yamok sauce; Yates' brother; yellow alert


==== Other references ====
Deep Space 9 schematic: cargo turbo subsystem; crew quarters; crossover bridge; defense sail; defense systems monitor; deflector emitter; docking clamp; docking control cabin; docking pylon; docking ring; docking ring airlock; environmental purge/fill station; exhaust cone; fusion reactor assembly; habitat ring; ops module; ore processing center; phaser strip; photon torpedo launcher; power transfer conduit; Promenade; radiator; reaction control thruster; runabout pad; sensor array; structural assembly; subspace antenna farm; tractor emitter; tug tractor emitter assembly


=== External links ===
"The Way of the Warrior" at Memory Beta, the wiki for licensed Star Trek works
"The Way of the Warrior" at Wikipedia
"The Way of the Warrior, Part I"(X) at StarTrek.com
The Way of the Warrior at the Internet Movie Database
"The Way of the Warrior" at MissionLogPodcast.com
"The Way of the Warrior" script at Star Trek Minutiae