Sisko and Kira aid Damar's rebellion against the Dominion; Bashir discovers that Odo is infected with the disease that is threatening the Founders. (Part 5 of 9)


== Summary ==


=== Teaser ===
Having just lost the Second Battle of Chin'toka, Chief O'Brien has determined that the only vessel immune to the Breen energy-dampening weapon was the Klingon Bird-of-Prey IKS Ki'tang. The chief engineer of the Ki'tang had coincidentally adjusted the tritium intermix of the vessel's warp core to compensate for a containment problem before the battle. As a result, Martok has ordered every Klingon vessel to make the same adjustments to their reactors to protect them from the Breen. Unfortunately, this "fix" works on neither Federation nor Romulan ships. O'Brien forwards his findings to both the Starfleet Corps of Engineers and the Romulan Ministry of Science for more in-depth analysis.
General Martok and Captain Sisko plan to use the Klingon fleet as a diversion, to occupy the attention of the Dominion and the Breen. In the meantime, Starfleet will continue searching for an answer to the Breen weapon, while hoping that the Cardassian uprising, led by Legate Damar, grows in strength, to further sap Dominion resources. Following his attack on the Dominion's facilities on Rondac III, Damar has gone into hiding; the Romulan General Velal notes that the Cardassian Liberation Front sustained heavy casualties in the Rondac attack (more than half their total number), and Sisko agrees Damar's rebels need to adjust their tactics to hit-and-run skirmishes and sabotage to have a chance of success in the long run. Sisko and Admiral Ross, aware Damar is a "by the book soldier" with little experience in guerrilla warfare, agree to send Colonel Kira to aid him as her years of experience in (ironically) the Bajoran Resistance could help teach Damar how to effectively wage a guerrilla campaign. Putting aside her personal feelings towards the man who murdered Ziyal, she agrees, and will (at Sisko's suggestion) also bring along Garak, whose experience in the Obsidian Order promises to pay dividends, too.


=== Act One ===
In the infirmary, Doctor Bashir convinces Odo to give him a sampling of his gelatinous state, as the doctor is working on a means of rapidly creating synthetic replacement organs for the war effort. Odo reluctantly agrees and tells Bashir that he will be joining Kira and Garak to find Damar.
On Bajor, Kai Winn feigns concern over the disappearance of Solbor, whom she recently murdered. Dukat, his true identity revealed to the Kai, continues to encourage her on her path toward unleashing the Pah-wraith from the Fire Caves. As she continues reading the sacred Book of the Kosst Amojan, Dukat offers to help her, but she refuses, saying the book's words are strictly for her eyes only.
On the station, it is revealed that Martok will be inducted into the Klingon Order of Kahless, considered to be a great honor. Kira and Garak enter Sisko's office to inform the captain that Garak has located Damar. However, while willing to put aside his personal feelings about Kira, Damar is concerned that having a Bajoran tactical advisor (particularly a prominent former member of the Bajoran Resistance) would undermine both his authority and his men's morale as a constant reminder of the occupation's defeat. In order to give Kira some sense of "authority" over her Cardassian comrades (and students), Sisko gives her a battlefield commission of Starfleet commander (the highest rank Sisko can confer on another, as a captain), allowing her to speak on behalf of the Federation.

Later, after Kira dons her new Starfleet uniform, Odo morphs his attire to more closely resemble how he appeared as Terok Nor's security chief (when DS9 was under Cardassian control). Garak then wonders if Bashir could surgically alter Kira's nose. But Kira is unwilling to go that far and the rebels are just going to have to put up with her presence. Garak responds that they will tolerate her to a certain degree, but he warns her that she, a Bajoran, should never trust the Cardassians she will soon be working with and training.


=== Act Two ===
In conversations with his officers at their current base of operations, Damar reveals that the revolt is not going well. The Cardassians are depleted in several key supplies, including food, as their food replicators have been destroyed. Damar indicates that Garak and Kira will bring  replicators with them. Rusot scoffs that they will be Federation food replicators, but Damar curtly reminds him their rebellion is in no position to turn down help, no matter who is offering. Rusot continues to gripe that while accepting help from the Federation is bad enough, accepting aid from Kira (whom he derides as a 'Bajoran terrorist') is even worse. Damar insists Kira has skills that they need. Rusot incredulously reminds Damar that he spent hours when they were stationed on Terok Nor complaining about how much he loathed Kira; Damar concedes the point, but replies indulging his hatred of Kira when it may cost them everything is a luxury he, nor Rusot, can afford.
Captain Sisko, Admiral Ross, and Lieutenant Commander Worf stand outside an airlock to greet Klingon chancellor Gowron, visiting from Qo'noS in order to induct Martok into the Order of Kahless. Gowron, who puts the past to rest with Worf, arrives with a barrel of bloodwine to be shared by old friends.
Doctor Bashir is speaking with Chief O'Brien about how Ezri Dax seems to be avoiding him since she returned from Cardassia. He indicates that he has called her to his office under the ruse of going over her medical test results, but really wants to get a sense of her feelings. When Dax arrives soon afterward, Bashir gets the wrong idea that she and Worf are a romantically-involved couple. As she tries to explain that they are only friends and that she's actually in love with Bashir, his attention is diverted to a disastrous finding in his lab: he discovers that Odo is infected with the same virus that is killing the Changelings of the Great Link. He contacts Odo, now under way to Damar, to notify him of his findings.


=== Act Three ===
Bashir thinks Odo contracted the disease while linking to the Female Changeling. He will keep on trying to find a cure and he'll ask Starfleet to share Odo's medical records with him.
In the middle of the night, Dukat sneaks into the Kai's study, unlocking the book, and reading its secret text. Suddenly, a beam of red energy (resembling a Pah-wraith) leaps from the pages of the book into Dukat's eyes, blinding him. He screams out loud in agony, waking Winn. "You fool!", she exclaims. "I warned you, the text of the Kosst Amojan is for my eyes alone!"
After Gowron awards Martok the Star of Kahless, Gowron informs everyone that he (Gowron) would be immediately taking command of the war effort; thus, a day of honor for Martok has become bittersweet, as he loses his command. Gowron tells Martok that he wants to take the weight off of him and that he will be assuming direct control of the Klingon defense forces. Martok is visibly dismayed but Gowron explains to the general that he intends to see a swift end to this war and says the Dominion will rue the day they heard his name.
Dr. Bashir is attempting to get Odo's medical records from Starfleet Medical to use as a point of comparison for his own records, however he is constantly been referred to elsewhere and is told he doesn't have the proper clearance. Eventually, he gets to speak to Commander Hilliard who is authorized to release the information. Hilliard asks Bashir some questions regarding Odo and his contact with the female founder, and still denies him clearance. Bashir attempts to argue, however Hilliard tells him that they can't risk him finding a cure in case it reaches the Founder before threatening to report Bashir to Starfleet Security if he doesn't drop the matter. Later at the Replimat, Bashir tells O'Brien how Starfleet has practically accused him of being in league with the Dominion just for wanting to help Odo. They decide to speak to Captain Sisko in the hopes he has the clearance to access the file.
Damar welcomes Kira to the headquarters of the Cardassian Liberation Front. While he is genuinely grateful for Kira's assistance, Gul Rusot still harbors long-standing ill will toward her, and makes no secret of it.


=== Act Four ===
Kira and Garak begin educating Damar's group in the art of resistance. The resistance group is to be split into different cells. Odo also points out a Dominion weapons depot on Adarak Prime, which is weakly defended, as a potential target. Damar and the other rebels initially balk at this attack plan, as it is guarded by fellow Cardassians. Kira insists they must be willing to kill those Cardassians who collaborate with the Dominion, citing her own willingness to kill Bajoran collaborators during the occupation, and warning Damar that if the Dominion realizes the rebels won't kill their own, they'll station Cardassians at every base. Damar reluctantly agrees with Kira on this and asks Odo to continue the briefing on the planet's security defenses, silencing Rusot's protests on the matter.
Luckily for Bashir, Sisko had the necessary clearance to obtain the medical files he needed, noting that there is more data than he expected. While Bashir is looking through the data, O'Brien mentions Dax, and Bashir says that she's involved with Worf. O'Brien states that Worf told him they were just friends and that Bashir must have misunderstood her. O'Brien asks Bashir if he ever found out why she was avoiding him and he says no. Before Bashir can go on, he realizes that the medical file is simply the results of the scans Dr. Mora took of Odo just after he discovered him (Mora having shared this with Bashir) instead of the data from his last check-up at Starfleet. It is clear this is no accident... Bashir was intentionally sent the wrong data in the hopes of throwing him off the trail for a cure. Knowing this isn't something Starfleet Medical would do, Bashir and O'Brien begin to wonder if Section 31 is somehow involved in the cover-up, since they wouldn't have a problem at all with letting Odo die if it meant protecting the Federation.
As Martok clears out his office on Deep Space 9, he and Worf contemplate on Gowron's decision to take over command of the fleet and trying to humiliate Martok at the same time. Worf explains that Gowron sees Martok's military successes as a threat to his position as Chancellor. Martok insists that he has no desire to challenge Gowron for his position because he is a soldier and not a politician. He also recalls that while Martok earned his position as General, Gowron became Chancellor through plotting and scheming. Worf also remarks that Gowron is nowhere near as good in strategy as Martok is. In spite of this, Martok nevertheless retains his allegiance to the Empire, regardless of its current direction. Martok has become very popular among other Klingons and is regarded as a savior, something Gowron won't tolerate as he wants to be the Empire's only savior. Regardless, Martok is still willing to serve his chancellor and help defeat the Dominion regardless of motives as he feels it is owed to those who have been lost during the war. Worf tells Martok of his pride to be a member of his house.
Trying to provoke Kira, Rusot questions Odo about his past association with Cardassians on Terok Nor, insinuating that Odo was himself a collaborator. Kira jumps to Odo's defense, but the cooler heads of Garak and Odo prevail... for now.
Odo, however, begins experiencing his first signs of the sickness, but keeps it a secret from everyone else, even Kira.


=== Act Five ===
On Bajor, the Kai informs a blind Dukat that doctors can find nothing wrong with his eyes; his condition is obviously a punishment from the Pah-wraiths, who took away his vision for reading the sacred texts. By now, the Kai has discerned Dukat's true loyalties, which don't lie with her, so she summons Deputy Bodan to escort Dukat out into the street, helpless; she refers to it as a "lesson in humility for a blind beggar." Screaming as he is brusquely shown the door, Dukat is told by the Kai to return when he has recovered his vision (i.e., when he has once again found favor with the Pah-wraiths). Now alone with the sacred book, the Kai devotes her full attention to studying it.
Gowron astonishes Worf and Martok by suggesting an aggressive course of action against the Dominion, rather than just holding the line until the Federation and Romulan vessels are back up to speed. Martok and Worf are incredulous, noting they can barely hold present battle lines. Citing the element of surprise and citing the glory to be had as saviors of the Alpha Quadrant, and despite Worf and Martok's insistence, Gowron declares that his risky strategy is not up for debate and will commence forthwith.
Meanwhile, in the infirmary, Quark brings some coffee to a weary Bashir and O'Brien as his way of helping find a cure for Odo. They cannot even let Sisko know, as the captain would be forced to report it to Starfleet, and their efforts would be further thwarted. Bashir decides to do a simulation to try and work out exactly when Odo was infected, only to discover it occurred almost three years ago on the date that he was 'examined' by Starfleet Medical. The two officers are horrified by the realization that Odo wasn't infected by the female founder as they'd assumed: instead, Odo was infected by Starfleet, as a Section 31 plot of genocide against the Changeling race, including Odo. Since Section 31 created the virus, they reason the organization must also have a cure but know that getting hold of it will be easier said than done.


== Memorable quotes ==
"Damar and Garak... should be an interesting mission."

- Kira

"Doctor, get to the point."
"I need to borrow a cup of goo."
"Excuse me?"
"I'll give it back!"

- Odo and Julian Bashir, while Bashir was asking Odo for a sample of his liquid form

"Well, gentlemen, it seems as if the Klingon fleet is the only thing that stands between us and the Dominion."
"What have we come to?"

- Ross and Velal

"Taking help from the Federation is bad enough, but having to take it from that Bajoran terrorist..."
"Kira Nerys has certain skills she's willing to teach us. Skills we need if we're going to defeat the Dominion."
"I can't believe what I'm hearing! When we were stationed on Terok Nor, you used to spend hours telling me how much you despised her."
"I did hate her. But that's a luxury I can no longer afford, and neither can you."

- Rusot and Damar discussing Kira

"Remember your place, Dukat!"
"I thought my place was in your bed."

- Winn and Dukat

"So, Martok, how does it feel to be the most famous warrior in the Empire?"
"I am grateful for the opportunity to serve."
"And you've served well, but you've borne the burden of this war for a long time."
"I'd do it gladly, and I'll keep on fighting until the victory is ours!"
"No, my friend. I can't ask you to carry this weight forever. It's time for me to take...a more active role in this war. As of today, I'm assuming direct command of our forces."
"Chancellor, I...I don't understand. Are you...unsatisfied with the way I have performed my duties?"
"Would I have given you the Star of Kahless if I was not satisfied? You should be happy. You're a warrior again. No more meetings, no more reports to file. You'll be out there, savoring the heat of battle. I envy you. I intend to see an end to this war and soon. The Dominion will rue the day they heard my name!!"

- Gowron and Martok

"Adami, I'm not the same man I was during the Occupation. The Pah-wraiths have changed me."
"But they can't change what you did. Do you really think I could let myself be touched by a man whose hands are stained with the blood of my people?"
"When we do release the Pah-wraiths from the Fire Caves, your hands will be stained as well."
"The Pah-wraiths will spare those they find worthy. The rest are of no consequence."

- Dukat and Winn

"I warned you! The text of the Kosst Amojan is for my eyes alone!"

- Winn

"Doctor Mora was kind enough to share his data with me. This looks like the scans he did when he first found Odo." 
"Are you sure? That's a lot of numbers there." 
"I saw it with my own eyes, not seven years ago."

- Julian Bashir and Miles O'Brien

"Section 31 must have created the virus, infected Odo, and then used him as a carrier."
"So that when he linked with another Changeling, he'd pass it on, and eventually the entire race would be infected."
"31 isn't just trying to stop us from finding a cure. They're trying to cover up the fact that they set out to commit genocide."
"Well, if they gave Odo this disease, then they must have a cure."
"We have to find a way to get our hands on that cure."
"Before 31 gets their hands on us."

- Bashir and O'Brien, about how Odo became infected by Section 31


== Background information ==


=== The Final Chapter ===
René Echevarria used this episode to execute his plan to stall the Dukat/Winn plot, after he realized during the composition of "'Til Death Do Us Part" that the story had been introduced too early and couldn't sustain itself over nine episodes; "We started it too soon and we ran out of story for them. Suddenly we realized that we didn't need them again until the final episode. I was told, 'Find a way to stall.' I needed to leave them in a place where the audience would feel, 'Okay, they're doing this, but I don't need to see them do it.' And I came up with the idea of blinding Dukat." Dukat's blindness and Winn having him thrown out onto the streets of the Bajoran capital effectively removes both Dukat and Winn from the arc for several episodes, until the finale "What You Leave Behind". (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion, p. 690)
As he had done with the wedding (moving it from "Strange Bedfellows" to "'Til Death Do Us Part"), Echevarria made another major alteration to the overall plot in relation to both this episode and the following one, "Tacking Into the Wind"; "When I began working on "When It Rains...", the idea we'd plotted out was that Odo would learn that Section 31 had used him to give the disease to the Founders, but he was not going to get sick, just as Typhoid Mary never got sick. She just spread the disease. But as I got into it, I began thinking 'So what? So you find out something that's happened in the past. There's nothing to be done about it.' And I was a good fifteen, twenty pages in when I made the realization that Odo had to get sick. Ron already was working on "Tacking Into the Wind", and when I told him, he flipped his gourd. He said, 'No! You'll ruin everything!' But we hashed it out, and he agreed in order for this to be an ongoing storyline that mattered, Odo needed to get sick." (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion, p. 691)
Originally, the plan for Damar was to have him working as a double agent, with Weyoun, Thot Gor/Thot Pran and the Female Changeling all still believing that he is serving the Dominion. However, Ron Moore pointed out that this meant that none of the regulars would ever be directly involved with Damar's story, that at most, he might have some subspace communication with them, but no actual interaction. As such, the Cardassian Rebellion plotline would involve only recurring characters, and although Damar was a popular character amongst fans and his plotline was important, it was felt necessary to get some regular characters directly involved. (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion, p. 690)
However, the decision to bring regulars into the Cardassian Rebellion plot had a serious knock-on effect. For the writers, the most logical choice of characters to send was Kira and Garak. However, David Weddle and Bradley Thompson were already working on "Extreme Measures", which, at this time, involved Kira and Odo hunting for a cure to the morphogenic virus. It was suggested that perhaps Kira could go to Cardassia, and Odo and Bashir could try to track down a cure, but Ira Steven Behr felt very strongly that Odo and Kira should not be split up at all during the arc, so it was ultimately decided to use O'Brien and Bashir to hunt for the cure, and send Kira, Garak and Odo to Cardassia. (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion, p. 691)


=== "When It Rains..." ===

The name of this episode is drawn from the English phrase "When it rains, it pours", said usually when a series of very bad things all happen in tandem. This is likely a reference to how much happens to the different characters and the series. For example, Odo's infection is revealed; Gowron takes direct control of the Klingon Defense Forces; and Kira, Garak and Odo go to help the Cardassian Liberation Front.
Ron Moore summed this episode up by declaring that "Damar is Spartacus!" (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion, p. 690)
Andrew J. Robinson felt that Garak and Damar should have had a scene in which they discussed Ziyal's death at Damar's hands in the sixth season episode "Sacrifice of Angels"; "The writers didn't give Garak a lot of room to adjust or react initially to Damar, given that Damar had killed Ziyal. It essentially went unresolved, and I had to squeeze some subtext into the beginning of the first scene between them." (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion, p. 699)
Nana Visitor also felt that a scene between herself and Damar in which they too discuss Ziyal would have been appropriate, but as she explains, "Ira pointed out that on a larger level, it didn't help anyone. We'd been trying to turn Damar into this new type of figure, and this would be a step backward. So we decided to focus more on Damar because he's the one torn between his Cardassian comrades and their feelings and dealing with Kira. It was the right choice." (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion, p. 699)
Odo begins to exhibit symptoms of the morphogenic virus in this episode, and Bashir determines that he was infected "over three years ago," during his time on Earth in the episodes "Homefront" and "Paradise Lost". Odo subsequently infected the Great Link in the fourth season finale "Broken Link". This could also mean that Odo infected Laas when he linked with him in "Chimera".
A deleted or unfilmed scene before Gowron's arrival saw Worf and Martok discuss Martok's apprehension at the upcoming ceremony. Martok thinks about attaching a kro'jek to his uniform. (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Companion - A Series Guide and Script Library)

A Federation display at the beginning of the episode on Deep Space 9 has labels such as 'JN 16' and 'JN 17' for various fleet deployment routes. This may mean that the final battles of the Dominion War took place in or around June 2375. There is also an icon for Subspace station AR-558 on the same display, in reference to the relay's importance in the siege of AR-558.
This episode is Robert O'Reilly's first appearance as Gowron in more than two years. He last played the character in the fifth season episode "By Inferno's Light" (though he did play the Replacement Accountant in DS9: "Badda-Bing, Badda-Bang").
Sub-Commander Velal of the Romulan Star Empire appears for the first time in this episode (although he is unnamed). He had been mentioned by Senator Cretak in the episode "Inter Arma Enim Silent Leges", who said that Velal would be her replacement while she attended the conference on Romulus. Presumably, after Cretak was relieved of her position in that episode, Velal's posting on Deep Space 9 became permanent. He would also appear in "The Dogs of War".
Velal says that Martok's 1,500 ships will be outnumbered by the combined Dominion, Cardassian, and Breen fleets by twenty to one. This would mean at this point in the war those three powers are fielding some thirty thousand ships.
This is the last episode of the series to have music composed by Paul Baillargeon.
If Worf appears conspicuously absent from this episode, it is partially because the episode was directed by Michael Dorn.
Cirroc Lofton does not appear in this episode.
Vaughn Armstrong makes his second appearance in the series, on his way to playing an unequaled thirteen roles in various Star Trek series.


=== Remastered version ===
Remastered scenes from the episode are featured in the documentary What We Left Behind


=== Video and DVD releases ===
UK VHS release (two-episode tapes, CIC Video): Volume 7.11, catalog number VHR 4821, 18 October 1999
As part of the DS9 Season 7 DVD collection


== Links and references ==


=== Starring ===
Avery Brooks as Captain Sisko


=== Also starring ===
Rene Auberjonois as Odo
Nicole deBoer as Lieutenant Ezri Dax
Michael Dorn as Lt. Commander Worf
Cirroc Lofton as Jake Sisko
Colm Meaney as Chief O'Brien
Armin Shimerman as Quark
Alexander Siddig as Doctor Bashir
Nana Visitor as Colonel Kira


=== Guest stars ===
Andrew J. Robinson as "Garak"
Casey Biggs as "Damar"
Marc Alaimo as "Gul Dukat"
J.G. Hertzler as "Martok"
Barry Jenner as "Admiral Ross"
Robert O'Reilly as "Gowron"
John Vickery as Rusot
Scott Burkholder as Hilliard


=== Special guest star ===
Louise Fletcher as "Kai Winn"


=== Co-stars ===
Stephen Yoakam as Velal
Vaughn Armstrong as Seskal
Colby French as Ensign Weldon


=== Uncredited co-stars ===
Michael Bailous as a Klingon officer
Scott Barry as a Klingon adjutant
Bill Blair as a Cardassian rebel 1
Uriah Carr as a Human civilian
Amy Kate Connolly as a Human command division officer
Brian Demonbreun as a Human science division officer
Virginia Murphy as Klingon adjutant
Mark Newsom as a Bajoran officer
Susie Stillwell as a Klingon officer
Unknown performers as
Bodan
Cardassian rebel 2
Cardassian rebel 3
Cardassian rebel 4
Three Klingon officers


=== References ===
2309; 2369; 2372; 2374; ability; accusation; Adarak Prime; advisor; Alpha Quadrant; amusement; AR-558; Badlands; Bajor; Bajorans; Bajoran doctor; Bajoran Resistance; barrel; battle group; battlefield; beggar; blind; bureaucrat; blinking; bloodwine; Breen; Bronok; Cardassia; Cardassian; Cardassian Liberation Front; carrier; cell; Chancellor; chief engineer; Chin'toka; classified; coffee; collaborator; commander; commission; cooling unit; cup; death; demotion; deputy; Dominion space; Douglas; Eminence; energy-dampening weapon; Federation; Ferenginar; Fire Caves; garrison; genetically enhanced; genocide; head of security (aka security chief); heart; Holy Grail; House of Martok; hyper spanner; Kahless; Khitomer; Kira family; Klingon Empire; "Kosst Amojan"; Kronos; life cycle; liver; medical exam; medical records; Mogh; Mora Pol; morphogenic enzyme; morphogenic enzyme analysis; morphogenic matrix; morphogenic virus; murder; muscle; name; Obsidian Order; Occupation of Bajor; Order of Kahless; organ replacement; organic tissue; Pah-wraiths; physiology; Quark's; rebel; replicator; resistance organization; resonance scan; Romulan Ministry of Science; Rondac; Section 31; sigma 9 clearance; Solbor; soldier; sortie; Starbase 375; Star of Kahless; Starfleet Corps of Engineers; Starfleet Headquarters; Starfleet Medical; Starfleet Security; supervising officer; synthetic organ; tactician; Terok Nor; Tora Ziyal; traitor; tritium intermix; warp core; weapons depot


==== Starship references ====
Bajoran interceptor (unnamed); Buruk, IKS; Danube-class; Ki'tang, IKS; Klingon Bird-of-Prey; NCC-73918; runabout


==== Unreferenced materials ====
barion radiation; burn-back; Carrington prize; (computer program); computer virus; continent; Cross of Kahless; cytromyaline; Damar's father; database; data-sifter; Department of Cartography; fear; Federation Headquarters; flowers; Festival of Lights; Goralis III; isolinear chips; Klingon warbirds; Kro'jek; Likarian asteroid belt; micro-explosive; Morn; routing log; Sixth Fleet; Sloan; squadron; swarm; trace resonance signature; Wendell Greer


=== External links ===
"When It Rains..." at Memory Beta, the wiki for licensed Star Trek works
"When It Rains..." at Wikipedia
"When It Rains..." at MissionLogPodcast.com
"When It Rains..." script at Star Trek Minutiae
"When It Rains..." at the Internet Movie Database