Glinn Boheeka was a Cardassian male who served as an officer in the Cardassian military during the late-24th century.


== Military career ==
During the Occupation of Bajor, Boheeka served on the orbital mining space station Terok Nor where he had many dealings with bar owner Quark. Boheeka had an infatuation with one of Quark's dabo girls, Hartla, later joking that had the occupation gone on any longer than it did, she would have bankrupted him. (DS9: "The Wire")
In 2370, Boheeka was contacted by Quark, for what Quark claimed was an opportunity for him to "earn a little extra latinum", "enough to buy himself a promotion". Quark needed Boheeka to locate a piece of Cardassian biotechnology and the schematics relating to its installation for Elim Garak. 
However, when Boheeka entered the requisition code number that Quark had given him, he discovered that it was a classified code for a piece of classified biotechnology. Upon the discovery of this, Boheeka exclaimed that he was ruined, and that his career was over. His fear was unfortunately justified, as it arose from the belief that the Obsidian Order would discover his request, and upon the realization of the situation, he and Quark quickly ended their transmission. Later, Bashir remarked upon Boheeka and Quark's business dealings to Enabran Tain, referring to Boheeka in the past tense. (DS9: "The Wire")


== Memorable quotes ==
"I'm sure she misses you too."
"I'll bet she does. She would've bankrupted me if the occupation would've lasted much longer."

- Quark and Boheeka, speaking of Hartla

"How'd you like to earn a little extra latinum? Maybe enough to buy yourself a promotion?"
"You have my undivided attention."

- Quark and Boheeka

"Quark, you idiot!"
"Is something wrong?"
"Is something wrong?! I'm ruined! My career is over!"

- Boheeka and Quark
"That Cardassian Quark was talking to, Boheeka. I suppose he really did have a reason to fear the Obsidian Order."
"Everyone has reason to fear the Order." 
- Bashir and Enabran Tain, on the Obsidian Order