Dukat, S.G. was a Cardassian military officer who served as Prefect of Bajor in the final years of the Bajoran Occupation. As the last person to hold the position, Dukat lost favor with Cardassian Central Command and fell into a downward spiral for several years. However, he became ruler of the Cardassian Union overnight, after he negotiated Cardassia's entry into the Dominion. Following his defeat in Operation Return and the death of his beloved daughter Ziyal, he suffered a complete mental breakdown and was captured by the Federation when it reclaimed space station Deep Space 9. He subsequently escaped, and became a disciple of the Pah-wraiths. Along with Kai Winn Adami, he attempted to release the Pah-wraiths into the Bajoran wormhole. Dukat was imprisoned in the Fire Caves with the Pah-wraiths, after a fateful confrontation with the Emissary of the Prophets. (Star Trek: Deep Space Nine)


== Career ==
One of Dukat's first assignments was as a newly minted glinn aboard the Kornaire. Among his tasks as a glinn was cleaning out a compartment where three men had gone through an explosive decompression, after which he could not sleep for a week. (DS9: "Waltz") At some point prior to being stationed on Bajor, Dukat was a legate, but he lost favor with Cardassian Central Command and was reduced to the rank of Gul. (DS9: "Indiscretion") He later rejected the title of legate because he felt Gul was more "hands on." (DS9: "Ties of Blood and Water")


=== Prefect of Bajor ===

By 2346, at the rank of gul, Dukat was made Prefect of Bajor. (DS9: "Wrongs Darker Than Death or Night")
In 2360, he was assigned command of Terok Nor, the mining station and command post in orbit of Bajor that was later known as Deep Space 9. (DS9: "The Maquis, Part I") Dukat was the last Prefect of Bajor before the end of the Occupation. He was responsible for many atrocities committed against the Bajoran people, and became one of the most hated individuals in Bajoran history. (DS9: "Emissary")
According to Dukat, he was convinced that a gentler approach was needed to quell the Bajoran Resistance and make Bajor suitable for colonization. His first act as prefect was to cut labor camp output quotas by fifty percent, abolish child labor, and improve medical care and food rations. These measures led to a twenty percent drop in the camp death rates. However, the Resistance repaid him by destroying an orbital drydock on his one-month anniversary, killing two hundred Cardassians. During the Occupation, the Resistance attempted to assassinate Dukat five times, all of them unsuccessful. Dukat grew to hate the Bajorans for not acknowledging his "compassion" towards them. (DS9: "Things Past", "Waltz")
Despite his latter admission of hatred for his charges, he conducted numerous affairs with Bajoran women, including Kira Meru, mother of Kira Nerys, and Tora Naprem, whom he claimed to love and with whom he fathered a daughter, Tora Ziyal. (DS9: "Indiscretion", "Wrongs Darker Than Death or Night", "Waltz")

Dukat was fond of Bajoran springwine. (DS9: "Wrongs Darker Than Death or Night")
While Prefect, Dukat reported to Legate Kell regularly; however, he did not have the respect from Kell that he was led to believe. Dukat created a counter-insurgency program to combat potential worker revolts on Terok Nor, but Kell secretly added a level to it in case Dukat tried to flee. The automated program was set to deal with various situations, the most severe of which was a complete takeover of the station. In the event that this happened, the program could initiate an auto-destruct sequence, and if Dukat tried to transport off the station while this sequence was in effect, his access codes would be nullified and he would be doomed to die with his station. (DS9: "Civil Defense")


=== Cardassian officer ===

Dukat strongly opposed the Cardassian withdrawal from Bajor in 2369, a move which damaged his career due to the politicians, such as Kotan Pa'Dar blaming him, as it occurred during Dukat's administration. During the evacuation and after a bombing, he had one of his female officers take Pa'Dar's son, Rugal, to an orphanage to, at some point, be used to humiliate Pa'Dar. After the withdrawal, Dukat became the commander of the Second Order and given the command of the Galor-class Prakesh. He played a major role in many interactions between the Cardassian military and the Federation for the next three years, and made several visits to his former command post, Deep Space 9, under various circumstances. (DS9: "Cardassians")

Dukat was implicated in the supplying of illegal weapons to Cardassian citizens in the Demilitarized Zone in 2370 by his political enemies, including Legate Parn. Arriving aboard DS9 as an unregistered passenger aboard a Kotakian ship, Dukat assisted Commander Benjamin Sisko in his investigation of the Maquis, so as to prove his innocence. He was briefly abducted by the Maquis, but he was rescued by Sisko. It emerged that the Cardassian Central Command was actually responsible for violating the Federation-Cardassian Treaty. (DS9: "The Maquis, Part I")
When the Cardassian Union underwent a revolution in 2372, Dukat sided with the victorious Detapa Council. He was made chief military adviser. Following the Klingon invasion of the Cardassian Union, Dukat was able to evacuate the council members to DS9 aboard the cruiser Prakesh, with the timely assistance of the USS Defiant. (DS9: "The Way of the Warrior") He was promoted to legate later that year. (DS9: "Indiscretion")

Dukat subsequently accompanied Kira Nerys to Dozaria to find the wreck of the Ravinok, a transport ship that had been lost several years earlier with Dukat's mistress, Tora Naprem, and his half-Bajoran daughter, Tora Ziyal, aboard. Dukat had initially intended to kill both Ziyal and Naprem, had they survived. However, after he found his daughter alive in a Breen mining camp on Dozaria, he decided to take her with him back to Cardassia, despite the effect it would have on his career. (DS9: "Indiscretion")


=== Fighting the Klingons ===

After he returned with Ziyal, Dukat was demoted and given command of a small freighter, the Groumall. His family disowned him, his wife and children left him, and both he and Ziyal were shunned by Cardassian society. Despite this, however, Dukat later noted that when it came to his daughter, he regretted nothing. (DS9: "Return to Grace")

In 2372, Dukat oversaw the Groumall on a courier mission to ferry Kira Nerys to the outpost at Korma. After finding the outpost destroyed, Dukat and Kira were able to capture the Klingon Bird-of-Prey responsible. Dukat urged the Detapa Council to use his captured intelligence to mount a new offensive against the Klingons, but they rejected his proposal, preferring to seek a diplomatic option. (DS9: "Return to Grace")
Disgusted with the Detapa Council's unwillingness to fight, Dukat began to carry on his own one-ship war against the Klingons. In 2373, he and his ship helped an undercover Starfleet team, led by Sisko, to infiltrate Klingon military headquarters on Ty'Gokor to expose a Changeling. (DS9: "Apocalypse Rising")


=== Alliance with the Dominion ===

By 2373, Dukat became convinced that the only way to regain Cardassia's former glory was for them to join the Dominion. In secret talks, he negotiated Cardassia's entry into the Dominion with himself as ruler. Dukat promised to the Cardassian people that under his leadership, all that Cardassia lost would be regained. His move was initially celebrated by most Cardassians, who had suffered defeat and humiliation for years at the hands of the Federation and Klingons. (DS9: "By Inferno's Light") Dukat chose not to promote himself back to legate, since he saw the rank of gul as more "hands-on." (DS9: "Ties of Blood and Water") One of Dukat's first acts was to have his Dominion allies release all surviving Cardassians from Internment Camp 371 with one exception – Elim Garak, who had not only killed Dukat's father but had also fallen in love with Ziyal. (DS9: "By Inferno's Light")
In the months after his taking office, Dukat made good on his promises by wiping out all Klingons and Maquis from Cardassian space with his newly gained Dominion allies. Dukat commanded the Dominion forces which retook Terok Nor from the Federation in late 2373. In the following weeks, Dukat directed the Dominion War from his old command, winning many early victories against the Federation and the Klingon Empire. Bringing in Dominion reinforcements from the Gamma Quadrant by re-opening the Bajoran wormhole was to be his greatest triumph. (DS9: "Call to Arms", "A Time to Stand")
However, victory was snatched from his grasp when the Dominion reinforcements were eliminated by the Prophets. As allied forces retook the station during Operation Return, Dukat – driven half-mad by his rapid change of fortune – descended into insanity after the murder of his beloved daughter Ziyal by Damar, his second-in-command. He refused to evacuate with the rest of the Dominion forces, and was captured by Starfleet. (DS9: "Sacrifice of Angels")


== Madness ==

Afterward, Dukat began suffering from hallucinations and fits of paranoia, and was treated by Federation doctors. After he was declared "recovered," Dukat was to be taken to a Special Jury at Starbase 621 aboard the USS Honshu to stand trial for war crimes, but the Honshu was intercepted by Cardassian warships. Dukat escaped to a nearby planet in a shuttlecraft with his adversary, Benjamin Sisko. Dukat's hallucinations returned, and he attempted to kill Sisko before escaping in the shuttle. During his time on the planet, Dukat embraced his hatred for the Bajoran people, promising to one day return and rain destruction on all of Bajor. Even more than before, his actions became increasingly proactively spiteful. (DS9: "Waltz")


=== Pact with the Pah-wraiths ===

In late 2374, Dukat believed he had found a way to destroy the Bajoran people and their Emissary, Sisko. Having immersed himself in the ancient Bajoran texts, he discovered that the wormhole was actually the Celestial Temple. He returned to Cardassia Prime and enacted an ancient Bajoran ritual to release a Pah-wraith into his body. Thus possessed, he traveled to Deep Space 9 and released it into the Celestial Temple via the Orb of Contemplation, causing the wormhole to disappear. In the process, Dukat killed Jadzia Dax, who was simply in his way. (DS9: "Tears of the Prophets")
His habitation by the Pah-wraith had turned Dukat into their believer; subsequently, he retreated to station Empok Nor and founded a community of members from the Cult of the Pah-wraiths. He was worshiped as a messiah, and fathered another half-Bajoran child, with Mika. Dukat never publicly admitted fatherhood. He instead tried to kill Mika, then attempted to have the cult members commit suicide to conceal his attempt to kill her. When he was exposed, Dukat fled again. (DS9: "Covenant")

In late 2375, Dukat secretly underwent cosmetic surgery on Cardassia Prime to pose as a Bajoran farmer, Anjohl Tennan. He then traveled to Deep Space 9 and gained the confidence of Kai Winn Adami and even became romantically involved with her – albeit for ulterior motives – and with the assistance of false visions given to Winn by the Pah-wraiths, he slowly convinced her to join him as a follower of the Pah-wraiths. During the Occupation, just after the Great Famine, Anjohl Tennan was one of a hundred Bajorans due to be executed by Gul Dukat's orders as a public example after the Bajoran Resistance destroyed the outpost in Relliketh. Winn, who was a ranjen at the time, had bribed the pilot of Anjohl's transport, Prenar, to "accidentally" misread his orders and divert his prisoners to a labor camp. Dukat later retold this story to Winn to further gain her trust. (DS9: "'Til Death Do Us Part")

Along with Winn, Dukat plotted to release the Pah-wraiths from their prison in the Fire Caves, using the Book of the Kosst Amojan. After Solbor eventually discovered what had happened to the real Anjohl Tennan, Dukat's true identity was exposed by Solbor, but he was in turn killed by Winn. (DS9: "The Changing Face of Evil")
Dukat accompanied Winn into the Fire Caves, where Winn poisoned Dukat as a sacrifice to complete the release ritual. However, the Pah-wraiths rejected Winn and chose Dukat as their Emissary, restoring him to life, returning his Cardassian features, and imbuing him with their power. Sisko tried to confront Dukat, but Dukat used his new power to force Sisko to his knees and taunt him. However, when Dukat was distracted by Winn's attempt to destroy the Book, Sisko used the distraction to stand up and throw himself and Dukat into the fires, which destroyed the book and trapped Dukat forever in the prison with the Pah-wraiths. Sisko himself was rescued by the Prophets. (DS9: "The Changing Face of Evil", "What You Leave Behind")


== Alternate timeline and realities ==

In an alternate timeline created by Q, Dukat lived in a universe where Earth had developed into an authoritarian society known as the Confederation of Earth. At some point in the 24th century, he battled General Jean-Luc Picard at the Ithian Forests, where he was killed.
According to Q, in that timeline Dukat had been the reason of General Picard receiving a synthetic body.
General Picard later displayed Dukat's skull in his trophy room. (PIC: "Penance")


== Family and personal relationships ==
Dukat's father was arrested and executed by the Cardassian government. Dukat blamed Obsidian Order operative Elim Garak for his father's death and ordered his execution at least twice. Dukat had his own dealings with the Obsidian Order after some involvement with arms merchants. However, it's also possible that the arms merchant was a reference to Dukat's father and the circumstances leading to his arrest and conviction. (DS9: "The Wire", "Improbable Cause", "The Die is Cast", "By Inferno's Light")
Dukat claimed to be married and have seven children with his wife. At one point in 2371, Dukat expressed regrets about missing the eleventh birthday of his son Mekor. However, he apparently abandoned these supposed family members when he found his daughter Ziyal. Furthermore, he also kept several Bajoran mistresses when he was Prefect on Terok Nor during the Bajoran Occupation. (DS9: "The Maquis, Part I", "Defiant", "Wrongs Darker Than Death or Night")


=== Benjamin Sisko ===
Dukat had a strange relationship with Benjamin Sisko, who was in many ways his counterpart and opposite. Dukat saw Sisko as a friend and viewed him with a great deal of respect, although that view was not shared by Sisko. However, after Dukat realized his hatred for the Bajorans and made his promise to destroy Bajor, he and Sisko became mortal enemies. They eventually confronted one another, one last time, in the Fire Caves. (DS9: "Waltz", "What You Leave Behind")


=== Damar ===
Dukat's closest friend was Damar, who served under him when he commanded the transport ship and later the stolen Klingon Bird-of-Prey and was his adjutant during his time as leader of the Cardassian Union. Dukat found Damar "useful" and despite the fact it was Damar who shot and killed his daughter, he later forgave Damar. Dukat came to him for help in his plan to release the Pah-Wraiths, even encouraging Damar to once again become the brave man he had fought with years before. (DS9: "Return to Grace", "Sacrifice of Angels", "Penumbra", "'Til Death Do Us Part", "Strange Bedfellows")
Damar had a great deal of respect for Dukat, looking up to him as a role model and mentor. He disliked seeing anyone show what he perceived as insufficient reverence to Dukat, and often sought his approval. Most notably, in his speech calling for resistance to Dominion occupation of Cardassia, Damar neglected to mention Dukat's role in Cardassia joining the Dominion, instead blaming a nebulous "government". (DS9: "The Changing Face of Evil")


=== Weyoun ===
Dukat also had a good working relationship with his Dominion ally Weyoun, and although they occasionally antagonized one another, there was a mutual respect between the two. Dukat even gave Weyoun a picture his daughter Ziyal had painted. (DS9: "Tears of the Prophets", "Penumbra", "'Til Death Do Us Part")


=== Elim Garak ===
Dukat had a deep-seated personal hatred of Garak, stemming largely from the death of his father. As an agent of the Obsidian Order, Garak tortured and killed Dukat's father. Dukat used those events to try to dissuade his daughter Ziyal from her relationship with Garak. (DS9: "For the Cause") This relationship with Dukat's daughter only strengthened his animosity toward Garak, driving Dukat to nearly kill him in Quark's in 2373. (DS9: "In Purgatory's Shadow") When Dukat commanded Terok Nor, he made at least one attempt to have Garak executed, but this attempt failed, which Garak later pointed out to Dukat's chagrin. (DS9: "Civil Defense")


=== Kira Nerys ===
In the years after the Occupation, Dukat and Kira Nerys crossed paths many times. Dukat was fascinated by Kira. Indeed, Dukat hinted on several occasions that he was romantically interested in her, referring to her as a "fascinating woman." Dukat complimented Kira on her talents and skills more than once, much to her disgust. He seemed to be determined to win Kira's respect and acknowledgement as a sort of vindication from his past actions. At times, however, both seemed to enjoy each other's company, to an extent, and were able to work together when it was required. (DS9: "Indiscretion", "A Time to Stand", "Return to Grace", "Apocalypse Rising")

Exemplifying how they were able to collaborate with each other, Dukat joined Kira on a mission to find the transport ship Ravinok; the two successfully located remaining crew members from that vessel and worked out a plan to rescue the prisoners. Dukat was also persuaded by Kira into sparing his illegitimate half-Bajoran daughter, Ziyal, and accepting her into his life. (DS9: "Indiscretion")

Additionally, when Dukat's ship transported Kira to a conference, the two enjoyed a meal together and subsequently collaborated to stop a group of Klingons operating behind Cardassian borders. Seeing that his new life of terrorism against the Klingons was not a good one for his daughter, Dukat allowed Kira to take Ziyal back to DS9 with her. This development pleased Dukat because he and Kira now had something in common. (DS9: "Return to Grace") Given this somewhat mother-like role he perceived Kira having for his daughter, Dukat blamed her when he discovered Ziyal had become romantically involved with Garak. (DS9: "In Purgatory's Shadow")

Dukat and Kira's relationship took on a much darker tone during the Dominion War, when Dukat took over as commander of Dominion-occupied DS9. He made a few rather obvious advances towards Kira, which she rebuffed with disgust. (DS9: "A Time to Stand", "Sons and Daughters")

Later, after he had become a disciple of the Pah-Wraiths, Dukat had Kira kidnapped to Empok Nor. There, he tried in vain to convince her to join the Cult of the Pah-wraiths community he had established on the station. (DS9: "Covenant")


=== Kira Meru ===

Kira Meru was one of Dukat's mistresses on Terok Nor during the Bajoran Occupation, with whom he fell in love and was involved for seven years before her death in 2353. Years later, Dukat developed an attraction to Meru's daughter, Kira Nerys, the first officer of Deep Space Nine. (DS9: "Wrongs Darker Than Death or Night")


=== Tora Ziyal ===
Towards the end of the Occupation, Dukat fell in love with another Bajoran woman, Tora Naprem, and the two had a daughter named Tora Ziyal. Dukat sent the pair away to Lissepia in 2366, though their ship was shot down by the Breen on Dozaria. Ziyal survived and was forced to labor in a Breen dilithium mine until Dukat rescued her in 2372. Tradition demanded that he kill her, but Dukat couldn't bring himself to do so, so he took her back to Cardassia Prime with him, whereupon he was severely ostracized. His wife and children left him and his mother disowned him. (DS9: "Indiscretion", "Return to Grace")
When Dukat became a terrorist in the Klingon-Cardassian War, he sent Ziyal to live on Deep Space 9 under the care of Kira, with whom she had formed a close relationship. (DS9: "Return to Grace") During the first Dominion offensive, Ziyal helped Kira and others in their efforts to sabotage the station and get it back into Federation hands. After the Dominion was forced to abandon DS9, Damar overheard Ziyal admit that she'd helped Kira and the other saboteurs escape, and he killed her before Dukat's eyes, declaring her a traitor. She died in Dukat's arms, an experience that left him deeply scarred and, together with the defeat in battle, was the beginning of his downward spiral into madness. (DS9: "Sacrifice of Angels") He subsequently spent many months under the psychological care of Federation doctors, often calling out Ziyal's name. (DS9: "Waltz")


=== Winn Adami ===
In late 2375, Dukat secretly underwent cosmetic surgery on Cardassia Prime to pose as a Bajoran farmer, Anjohl Tennan. He then traveled to Deep Space 9 and gained the confidence of Kai Winn Adami and even became romantically involved with her – albeit for ulterior motives – and with the assistance of false visions given to Winn by the Pah-wraiths, he slowly convinced her to join him as a follower of the Pah-wraiths.
Along with Winn, Dukat plotted to release the Pah-wraiths from their prison in the Fire Caves, using the Book of the Kosst Amojan. After Solbor eventually discovered what had happened to the real Anjohl Tennan, Dukat's true identity was exposed by Solbor, but he was in turn killed by Winn. (DS9: "The Changing Face of Evil"). Following the reveal of his true identity, Winn rejected Dukat as a lover and attempted to banish him from her sight, only to fail knowing that she required Dukat's aid in unlocking the secrets of the Kosst Amojan. Dukat attempted to read from the Kosst Amojan, which was only meant for the eyes of the Bajoran Kai, and was rendered blind by the Pah-Wraiths. Following this, Winn banished Dukat to live as a beggar on the streets of Bajor until such a time that the Cardassian had found humility. Upon his return, the two continued to work on unlocking the secrets of the Pah-Wraiths, eventually discovering that the entities were imprisoned within the Fire Caves of Bajor.
Dukat accompanied Winn into the Fire Caves, where Winn poisoned Dukat as a sacrifice to complete the release ritual. However, the Pah-wraiths rejected Winn and chose Dukat as their Emissary, restoring him to life, returning his Cardassian features, and imbuing him with their power. During the ensuing fight with captain Sisko, Winn attempted to destroy the Kosst Amojan, only to fail and in turn be killed by Dukat who summoned a pillar of flames to incinerate Winn, killing her instantly. However, Winn's attempt to destroy the book and her subsequent death provided enough of a distraction for Sisko to tackle Dukat and throw him into the fiery pits, destroying the Kosst Amojan and leaving Dukat imprisoned with the Pah-Wraiths for all eternity. (DS9: "What You Leave Behind").


== Memorable quotes ==
"My oldest son's birthday is in five days. To him, and to Cardassians everywhere, I make the following pledge: By the time his birthday dawns, there will not be a single Klingon alive inside Cardassian territory, or a single Maquis colony left within our borders."

- Dukat (DS9: "By Inferno's Light")

"Cardassia will be made whole. All that we have lost will be ours again. And anyone who stands in our way will be destroyed. This I vow with my life's blood: for my son, for all our sons."

- Dukat (DS9: "By Inferno's Light")

"A few days ago, I swore all Cardassia lost would be regained. That space station you're so fond of was built by Cardassia."
"Funny. I thought it was built by Bajoran slave labor."

- Dukat and Benjamin Sisko (DS9: "By Inferno's Light")

"Still calling yourself 'Gul'? I'm surprised you haven't promoted yourself back to Legate by now."
"I prefer the title 'Gul'; so much more hands-on than Legate. And less pretentious than the other alternatives: President, Emperor, First Minister... Emissary."

-Sisko and Dukat (DS9: "Ties of Blood and Water")
"Are you INSANE"?

- Dukat to Weyoun after the latter downs a glass of poisoned kanar (DS9: "Ties of Blood and Water")

"They thought I was their enemy! They don't know what it means to be my enemy, but they will! From this day forward, Bajor is dead! All of Bajor! And this time, even their Emissary won't be able to save them!"

- Dukat to Benjamin Sisko (DS9: "Waltz")