The Enterprise crew finds witches, a black cat, and a haunted castle on a distant planet.


== Summary ==


=== Teaser ===
A landing party of Sulu, Scott, and Crewman Jackson on Pyris VII is overdue for a routine check-in, when Jackson finally answers the USS Enterprise's urgent hails. His disconcerting message: one to beam up. Captain Kirk and Dr. Leonard McCoy are present in the transporter room when Jackson is beamed aboard by Kyle. Jackson materializes on the transporter pad and then immediately falls off down to the floor, where McCoy pronounces him dead. But then a sonorous voice from Jackson's dead lips tells Kirk that his ship is cursed; he must leave or all will die.


=== Act One ===
"Captain's log, stardate 3018.2. Crewman Jackson is dead… and there are no apparent physical causes. Mr. Scott and Mr. Sulu are still out of touch on the planet below. Leaving Assistant Chief Engineer DeSalle in command of the Enterprise, I'm beaming down to the planet's surface to find my two missing crewmen… and discover what killed Jackson."
With two crewmen missing and a mysterious death, Kirk doesn't plan to leave just yet. He organizes a second landing party: himself, Spock, and Dr. McCoy. They beam to the point from which Jackson was beamed up. There, Kirk intends to discover what happened to his missing men, and what killed Jackson.
The planet is fogbound, something extremely unlikely given the environmental conditions, as there are no cloud formations or bodies of water on the planet. Proceeding towards a reading of nearby lifeforms, the landing party encounters three witches; the spectral hags again warn Kirk to leave. Winds and fog try to thwart the landing party, but they eventually discover a large castle – the source of the lifeform readings. Entering the castle, they find a black cat and identify all the iconography of old Earth tales.

On the bridge of the Enterprise, Ensign Chekov reports to assistant chief engineer DeSalle that the landing party's lifeform readings are the only ones on the planet. As the landing party entered the castle, he then says they have simply stopped registering. DeSalle asks Chekov to check the scanning equipment for malfunctions but Chekov already has – the equipment is functioning perfectly. DeSalle then orders Chekov to recalibrate the scanners.
The landing party explores the castle further and falls through the floor, plunging them down to a dungeon chamber, and unconsciousness.


=== Act Two ===
Awakening, the landing party discovers they are manacled to the dungeon walls. Scott and Sulu appear, and Kirk is at first relieved to see his missing men. Then he realizes they're marching to someone else's drum: alive, but unresponsive and no longer allies. The two enthralled men free Kirk, Spock, and McCoy, and herd them towards the door at phaser point; a brief scuffle is halted when all the men are suddenly – elsewhere, in the presence of a strange robed man.
This is Korob, decked out in wizard's finery, with robe, wand, and black cat. Spock's comment that mapping expeditions have not discovered lifeforms on Pyris VII wrings a small truth from Korob – that he is not native to this world. Korob first plies the crew with food and drink, then with fortunes in gemstones – all to get them to leave without asking more questions. But Kirk tells Korob he could manufacture such stones by the ton on his ship; they're valueless, a fact that conflicts with whatever research Korob has done. Korob then reveals that the events were staged to test the landing party. He has learned they are loyal, brave, and incorruptible.
Sylvia enters. She tells Kirk that she can read and control the minds of men. Spock states that it must be telepathy and Sylvia says "Not entirely," and explains that telepathy is only a part of what she does. Kirk briefly overpowers Scott, seizing his phaser, and when he refuses to return it, Sylvia reveals another skill: she can perform sympathetic magic. She admits that she thought of Jackson in her mind, and when she killed the image and knew it was dead, so was the real Jackson. A small model of the Enterprise, held in the flame of a candle – and the real ship, orbiting above, begins to grow hot. Chekov reports to DeSalle that the temperature has jumped sixty degrees in just thirty seconds. "We're burning up, sir," he states.


=== Act Three ===
Seizing Sylvia's arm, Kirk moves the model Enterprise away from the flame, and the real starship from danger. Kirk tries to surmise how they are able to do all of this and says "You seem to do with your mind, what we do with tools. You alter matter and move it about by telekinesis." Korob begins to answer saying "Yes we can change…" when Sylvia cuts him off, stating that he talks too much. When Kirk suggests that landing parties will soon appear, Korob seals the model Enterprise in a solid Lucite block – and above, the ship is suddenly surrounded by a force field unlike anything ever encountered, which doesn't come from anywhere.
On the Enterprise, Chekov cannot analyze the force field, but as it is nonetheless real, DeSalle orders him to attempt to "put a dent in it".
Kirk and Spock are returned to the dungeon, while McCoy remains with Sylvia, who intends to question him. Kirk and Spock spend some time speculating about Sylvia and Korob, and Kirk decides they must be stopped. Their questions and interest seems to him a little too sinister. McCoy eventually returns, but Sylvia has taken control of him; he, Sulu, and Scott take Kirk to Sylvia.
Meanwhile, Sylvia and Korob argue. Sylvia likes her new sensations, and it's obvious that the interest goes further than their original plan. Wherever these aliens call home, they have nothing like them – and she intends to remain here. Korob reminds her they have a duty to the Old Ones, a fact she considers unimportant in light of her new infatuation.
Kirk is returned to Sylvia's presence, where he learns she is infatuated with him, as well. She reveals her plan: to dispose of Korob and join with Kirk. But Kirk is using her, gaining answers through manipulation. Among other things, he learns that the transmuter is the key to her power, and is a mechanism that facilitates the actualization of thought. But she discovers the deception, and has McCoy, Scott, and Sulu haul Kirk back to his cell.
On the Enterprise, Chekov reports that they had an effect on the force field, identifying a small electrical field as a start.
Korob finds Kirk and Spock; he reveals he has released the Enterprise, and he releases them. He also reveals that he can no longer control Sylvia or her pawns, and that he considers her dangerously irrational. He is regretful, offering his opinion that their visit could have been a peaceful one. Time presses, and he cannot explain in detail; instead, he urges the men out of their cell, where they again encounter the black cat – now grown to enormous size.


=== Act Four ===

The men are forced to retreat back into their cell, where they attempt to escape through the ceiling. The cat forces the door of the cell, however, crushing Korob. Kirk now has an opportunity to retrieve the wand.
Escaping through the ceiling, Kirk and Spock are confronted by their own enthralled crew, and a brief scuffle ends with Sylvia's pawns out of action, and the reappearance of the cat, as well as Sylvia. The wand Kirk has retrieved is the transmuter, and Sylvia wants it very badly. She transports Kirk away from Spock into the main hall and tells him to give her the transmuter. She informs him that she has a less powerful and simpler mechanism, and that it's Korob's wand which holds the key to their power. Sylvia is reluctant to simply seize the device from Kirk, despite her contention that he does not know how to use it.
Finally, Sylvia threatens Kirk with a phaser, demanding the transmuter. Kirk responds by raising the transmuter and shattering it on the table. There is a blinding white flash and, suddenly, Kirk finds himself outside with Spock, as well as McCoy, Sulu, and Scott – all of whom are now free of Sylvia's control – and the castle has vanished entirely. Kirk's destroying the transmuter has undone everything... or almost everything. At the landing party's feet, two small aliens wither and fall. Deprived of the transmuter, Sylvia and Korob have resumed their real forms, and are as Sylvia described them: feathers in the wind, lifeforms that are totally alien to their universe. The small aliens that were Korob and Sylvia quickly perish, and both landing parties return to the Enterprise.
The Enterprise leaves the orbit of Pyris VII and flies off into space, heading for new adventures.


== Log entries ==
Captain's log, USS Enterprise (NCC-1701), 2267


== Memorable quotes ==

"Captain Kirk! Can you hear me? There is a curse on your ship. Leave this place, or you will all… die!"

- Jackson's mouth, speaking in Korob's voice warning Kirk

"Captain Kirk! … Captain Kirk! … Captain Kirk!"
"Go back! … Go back! … Go back!"
"Remember the curse!"
"Wind shall rise!"
"And fog descend!"
"So leave here, all, or meet your end!"

- Three illusory witches, warning away Kirk, Spock, and McCoy

"Spock. Comment?"
"Very bad poetry, captain."
"A more useful comment, Mister Spock."

- Kirk and Spock, on the curse

"If we weren't missing two officers and a third one dead I'd say someone was playing an elaborate trick or treat on us."
"Trick or treat, captain?"
"Yes, Mr. Spock. You'd be a natural."

- Kirk and Spock, on the Halloween references

"Mr. Chekov, recalibrate your sensors. If you need help –"
"I can do it, sir. I'm not that green."

- DeSalle, patronizing Chekov after he loses readings of the landing party

"Bones? Doc?"

- Kirk, after seeing a skeleton in chains next to McCoy

"Where did your race get this ridiculous predilection for resistance, hmm?  You examine any object. You… you question everything! Is it not enough to accept what is?"

- Korob

"You can't think a man to death."

- Kirk, on sympathetic magic

"Maybe we can't break it, but I'll bet you credits to navy beans we can put a dent in it!"

- DeSalle, determined to free the Enterprise from Korob's force field

"You are using me! You hold me in your arms and there is no fire in your mind! You're trying to deceive me! It's here like words on a page! You are using me!"
"And why not?!! You've been using me and my crew!!"
"You will be swept away. You! Your men! Your ship!! Your worlds!!!"

- Sylvia and Kirk

"Captain, a little more alacrity, if you please."

- Spock, as he and Kirk escape the dungeon

"Everything's vanished."

- Scott, after awakening from the mind control

"All of this, just an illusion."
"No illusion. Jackson is dead."

- McCoy and Kirk, after seeing Sylvia and Korob die


== Background information ==


=== Production timeline ===
"Broomstick Ride" is published in Super-Science Fiction: December 1957 [1]
Story outline by Robert Bloch: 9 March 1967
Revised story outline: 14 March 1967
First draft teleplay: 29 March 1967
2nd draft teleplay: 14 April 1967
Final draft teleplay by D.C. Fontana: 24 April 1967
Revised final draft by Gene Roddenberry: 27 April 1967
Additional page revisions by Gene Coon: 4 May 1967, 5 May 1967, 10 May 1967
Filmed: 2 May 1967 – 11 May 1967
Day 1 – 2 May 1967, Tuesday – Desilu Stage 9: Int. Bridge, Transporter room
Day 2 – 3 May 1967, Wednesday – Desilu Stage 10: Ext. Pyris VII surface
Day 3 – 4 May 1967, Thursday – Desilu Stage 10: Int. Castle corridors
Day 4 – 5 May 1967, Friday – Desilu Stage 8: Int. Dungeon
Day 5 – 8 May 1967, Monday – Desilu Stage 8: Int. Dungeon, Great hall
Day 6 – 9 May 1967, Tuesday – Desilu Stage 8: Int. Great hall
Day 7 – 10 May 1967, Wednesday – Desilu Stage 8: Int. Great hall, Castle corridors miniature shots
Day 8 – 11 May 1967 (Half Day), Thursday – Desilu Stage 8: Int. Castle corridors miniature shots
Score recording, 21 June 1967
Premiere airdate, 27 October 1967
1st rerun, 24 May 1968
First UK airdate: 20 April 1970
Remastered airdate, 28 October 2006


=== Title ===
The title of this episode, "Catspaw", is a term that describes a person used by another as a dupe; as McCoy points out, Scott and Sulu are used as catspaws to lure more crewmen down.


=== Story and production ===
Robert Bloch based this episode very loosely on his own short story "Broomstick Ride." Bloch also wrote "What Are Little Girls Made Of?"  In both episodes, the "Old Ones" figure into the guest characters' backstories. [2]
Although this was the first episode of TOS Season 2 in production (filmed in early May 1967), it did not premiere until the week of Halloween, 1967. It was, in fact, written in a Halloween-type theme for just that reason. This episode also remains to date the only Star Trek production produced as a "holiday special" type episode.
This episode marks several changes to the episode credits. From this point on, the episode titles and end credits are in the same font as the main title of the series. Directors and writers are credited at the beginning of Act One instead of the end of the last act. DeForest Kelley's name is added to the opening credits. Also, Gene Roddenberry is credited as series creator in the opening credits.
Several bloopers from this episode can be found in the second season blooper reel. [3]
This episode introduces two plot elements that were revisited in stories later in season 2. First, the theme of extragalactic aliens taking Human form and then becoming inundated with Human sensations was revisited in "By Any Other Name". Second, the subject of an eccentric man with uncommon powers and accompanied by an apparently intelligent black cat, who later turns into a black haired woman, is revisited in "Assignment: Earth".
The three witches' appearance and manner of speech are reminiscent of (though not necessarily directly referential to) characters in Shakespeare's Macbeth.


=== Cast ===

Walter Koenig joined the cast as Pavel Chekov in this episode, despite his character having already met Khan Noonien Singh in the previous season's "Space Seed" as noted in Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan; also note the rather large wig worn by Walter Koenig in this episode which was later dispensed with when his own hair was long enough.
This was the third and final appearance of Michael Barrier as DeSalle. The character has been promoted to assistant chief engineer because the producers thought they need someone in charge of main engineering while Scott was in command of the bridge. However, as no such situation arose in any episodes, DeSalle has never made another appearance. (These Are the Voyages: TOS Season Two, p. 46)
James Doohan's only dialogue in this episode is the statement "Everything's vanished". George Takei doesn't speak at all; he simply nods "yes" and "no" when his character is queried by Kirk, and later cries "Aha!" before engaging Kirk in hand-to-hand combat. This is Takei's only non-speaking appearance in the entire series.
Theo Marcuse died in a car accident one month after this episode aired.
The role of Crewman Jackson was played by regular Star Trek stuntman Jay Jones. In a 1996 retrospective interview, Jones claimed that the role of Jackson was his first assignment on Star Trek. (Science Fiction Television Series, Mark Phillips and Frank Garcia, McFarland and Co.)
This is the first episode to feature all seven of the "classic" cast members who were brought back for future big screen adventures: Kirk, Spock, McCoy, Scott, Uhura, Sulu, and Chekov, although they do not all appear in the same scene together.


=== Props and effects ===

A detailed metal prop miniature of the Enterprise was created for this episode, then laminated in lucite as one of Korob's tricks. The miniature was donated to the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum by Gene Roddenberry. (The Star Trek Compendium, p. 70)
The Ornithoid life forms were marionettes composed of blue fluff, pipe cleaners, crab pincers, and other materials. The marionettes were operated with thick, black threads that were clearly visible; most of this was corrected in the remastered version of the episode. (The Star Trek Compendium, p. 70)
The three witches seen towards the start of the episode were intended to be shown as floating severed heads, hence the reaction from the landing party at their appearance. The characters wore black turtlenecks against a black backdrop, with light shining directly up into the face. Unfortunately, the effect did not work and the turtlenecks worn by the actors can clearly be seen. Even in the remastered version of the episode, this oversight is still present. (The Star Trek Compendium, p. 70)
This is the first episode in which a scope can be seen at the engineering station on the bridge. The science station scope was slightly altered for this episode; it is of a lighter color than the science scope used in episodes of the first season and has a circular control added to its left side. This dial control, as first seen in this episode, would remain throughout Seasons 2 and 3.
The blue planet used in this episode as Pyris VII (albeit a darker blue to illustrate the spookiness of the planet) was reused in subsequent episodes, representing Argelius II in "Wolf in the Fold", Sigma Iotia II in "A Piece of the Action", Troyius in "Elaan of Troyius", and Scalos in "Wink of an Eye", which were all lighter blue color.
The wizard's robe worn by Korob is the same costume that was previously worn by Bob Denver in the Gilligan's Island episode "Lovey's Secret Admirer", which aired on January 23, 1967. [4]
The cat was made to hiss by bringing in a dog to annoy it. [5]


=== Continuity ===
In this episode, DeSalle wears a red engineering tunic, unlike the gold command tunic he wore in "The Squire of Gothos" and "This Side of Paradise". The character started out as a navigator in "Squire", then served as a science officer in "Paradise", ending up as an engineer here.
The short scene of crewmen in turtleneck uniforms walking in a corridor during red alert is stock footage from "Where No Man Has Gone Before". This marks the last time that these uniforms are worn by Enterprise crewmembers.
The events of this episode take place on stardate 3018.2 which means it took place right after the events of TOS: "The Menagerie, Part II", whose events took place on stardate 3013.1-3013.2, and before the episode TOS: "Shore Leave" whose events take place from stardate 3025.3-3025.8.


=== Remastered information ===
"Catspaw" was the eighth episode of the remastered version of The Original Series to air, premiering in syndication on the weekend of 28 October 2006. Aside from the standard remastering of the effects used for the USS Enterprise, the most notable revised features include new effects shots of Pyris VII, as well as the castle on the surface, with the original shot of the castle entry completely retained as part of the full building. The transmuter effect was also touched up and most of the visible wires controlling the Ornithoid life forms were digitally erased.

The next remastered episode to air was "The Trouble with Tribbles".


=== Video and DVD releases ===
Original US Betamax release: 1986
US LaserDisc release: 8 May 1986
UK VHS release (two-episode tapes, CIC Video): Volume 16, catalog number VHR 2328, release date unknown
Japan LaserDisc release: 25 March 1993
US VHS release: 15 April 1994
UK re-release (three-episode tapes, CIC Video): Volume 2.1, 3 February 1997
Original US DVD release (single-disc): Volume 15, 11 July 2000
As part of the TOS Season 2 DVD collection
As part of the TOS-R Season 2 DVD collection


== Links and references ==


=== Starring ===
William Shatner as Captain Kirk
Leonard Nimoy as Spock
DeForest Kelley as Dr. McCoy


=== Guest star ===
Antoinette Bower as Sylvia


=== Co-starring ===
Theo Marcuse as Korob


=== Featuring ===
James Doohan as Scott
George Takei as Sulu
Nichelle Nichols as Uhura
Walter Koenig as Chekov
Michael Barrier as DeSalle


=== With ===
John Winston as Transporter Chief
Rhodie Cogan as First Witch
Gail Bonney as Second Witch
Maryesther Denver as Third Witch
Jimmy Jones as Crewman Jackson


=== Uncredited co-stars ===
William Blackburn as Hadley
John Blower as Swenson (deleted scene)
Frank da Vinci as Brent
Jeannie Malone as a yeoman
Eddie Paskey as Leslie
Frieda Rentie as a Lieutenant
Unknown actress as Crew woman
Unknown cat as Cat in corridors


=== Stunt doubles ===
Bob Bass as stunt double for James Doohan
Frank da Vinci as stunt double for Leonard Nimoy
Gary Downey as stunt double for William Shatner
Jimmy Jones as stunt double for DeForest Kelley
Carl Saxe as stunt double for Theo Marcuse
Vic Toyota as stunt double for George Takei


=== References ===
"all right"; ability; ambition; amplifier; analysis; animal; answer; arm; assistant chief engineer; attitude; azimuth; bear; beef; "bet you credits to navy beans"; billion; boar; body of water; "Bones"; black; blinking; bravery; bribery; bypass power; castle; cat; catspaw; cell; chance; choice; cloud formation; cobweb; colleague; color; compassion; comrade; consciousness; contact; coordinates; creature; credit; crystal; curse; damage; danger; data; day; death; degree (angle); degree (temperature); demon; demonstration; desire; diamond; doctor; door; dream; drug; dungeon; dust; Earth; effect; electrical field; emerald; environment; experience; eye; failure; familiar; feather; fire; fog; fool; force field; "for the moment"; friend; ghost; ghost story; green; Halloween; heat; heat-dissipation unit; host; hull; Human (aka Earthman); hypnosis; idea; illusion; image; impulse engine; "in error"; information; "in order"; inquiry; iron maiden; key; knowledge; lace; landing party; landing party procedure; legend; lifeform; location; logic; love; loyalty; luxury; mace; magic; magic wand; magnetic field; malfunction; mapping expedition; mark; martial arts; matter; meter; Milky Way Galaxy; mind; mind probing; minute; mistake; model; molecular structure; mumbo jumbo; myth; mythology; name; navy bean; nightmare; object; ogre; Old Ones; onion; "on the double"; orbit; page; pain; parallel development; pattern; peace; peacock; phaser; place; poetry; power; power system; puppet; Pyris VII; Pyris VII system; prisoner; race; racial subconscious (aka racial memories); range; reactor; relay station; reality; ruby; saber-toothed tiger; sapphire; Satan; science; scientific method; search party; second; sensation; sensor; sensor scan; "Singing a different tune"; skeleton; specimen; "stand by"; standby alert; static interference; stranger; subconscious; superstition; surface; surface temperature; symbol; sympathetic magic; tablecloth; telekinesis; telepathy; temperature; thing; thought; threat; tool; traitor; transmuter (aka power pack); trick; trick or treat; tricorder; twilight world; Vulcan neck pinch; water; wavelength analysis; weapon; white; will; wind; wine; witch; wizard; word


=== Unused references ===
solar day; Starbase 9


=== External links ===
"Catspaw" at Memory Beta, the wiki for licensed Star Trek works
"Catspaw" at Wikipedia
"Catspaw" at MissionLogPodcast.com
"Catspaw" at the Internet Movie Database