A powerful teenage boy wreaks havoc aboard the Enterprise.


== Summary ==


=== Teaser ===
The USS Enterprise makes a rendezvous with the USS Antares, a survey ship. While investigating the desolate planet Thasus, the Antares discovered an adolescent boy named Charles Evans, the sole survivor of a ship crash who has lived on his own since age three, learning to speak from the ship's computerized records. Evans transfers to the Enterprise, which is on its way to Colony Alpha V, where his only known relatives live.
Captain Ramart and his navigator and first officer, Tom Nellis, are eager to be on their way after beaming aboard the Enterprise, even refusing Captain Kirk's offers of Saurian brandy and use of the Enterprise's entertainment tapes; yet, they are also effusive in their praise of Charlie. Charlie interrupts Ramart and Nellis a couple of times, which prompts Kirk to say to him, "You keep interrupting, Mr. Evans. That's considered wrong." Yeoman Janice Rand enters the transporter room and Kirk asks her to show Charlie to his quarters and to drop off his medical records at sickbay. Innocently, Charlie asks Captain Kirk if Yeoman Rand is a girl. "That's a girl," the captain replies. Rand escorts Charlie out, much to Kirk's amusement.


=== Act One ===

After a routine check-up by Dr. McCoy, Charlie attempts to learn and integrate, demonstrating the effect of his years away from all Human contact. At the same time, strange incidents occur in his vicinity. Charlie is also struggling mightily with adolescence and with his first crush – Janice Rand. After observing Crewman Wilson and a sciences division crewman slapping each other casually, Charlie does the same to Yeoman Rand's behind in a corridor, shocking her. Afterward, Rand advises Charlie to tell Captain Kirk or Dr. McCoy what he had just done and ask them for advice before suggesting that he meet her after she goes off-duty. Kirk confers with McCoy and Spock, who are debating how Charlie could have survived on Thasus when scans of the planet show that it has almost no edible vegetation. McCoy urges Kirk to spend more time with Charlie, reasoning that he needs a "father figure".
In the Enterprise's recreation room on deck three, Uhura is singing "Oh, On the Starship Enterprise" to a rapt Rand and other crew members. When Rand ignores Charlie, he secretly uses his power to silence Uhura's voice, as well as the sounds coming from Spock's Vulcan lute, so that he can have Rand's undivided attention. Charlie then proceeds with a few card tricks – such as turning cards face down, and then turning them over again to reveal color photographs of Rand on the playing side. This amuses Rand and others in the crew lounge, who applaud Charlie appreciatively.
Later, in a corridor, Kirk is advising a galley chef that on Earth today it is Thanksgiving, and if the crew of the Enterprise has to eat synthetic meat loaf, he wants it to look like turkey. Just then, Charlie arrives and tells Kirk of the trouble he had interacting with Rand earlier. Kirk awkwardly attempts to explain that men and women do things differently, but before he can elaborate further to Charlie, Kirk is asked to come up to the bridge by Uhura.
At extreme range, Captain Ramart attempts to contact the Enterprise and speak to Captain Kirk, but before he can say more than "I've got to warn...", his ship is destroyed. Charlie advises Kirk that "It wasn't very well constructed," a strange comment, since it comes before Spock actually confirms the Antares's destruction. Kirk is then hailed by the Enterprise's chef, who tells the captain that he had put meatloaf in the ovens, but now there are turkeys in them now – real turkeys. Charlie laughs at hearing this, then leaves the bridge abruptly, leaving Kirk feeling that the boy is hiding something.


=== Act Two ===

Kirk and Spock are pondering the destruction of the Antares during a game of three-dimensional chess when Charlie walks in and asks to play. After defeating Spock in an "illogical approach" to the game, Kirk turns it over to Charlie, only for Spock to easily beat him in two moves. Spock leaves just as Charlie, in a fit of rage, uses his power to melt several chess pieces. Afterwards, Rand introduces Charlie to Yeoman Third Class Tina Lawton, who is near Charlie's age. Charlie ignores Lawton, hurting her feelings, after which Rand tells Charlie that he was rude to her. Charlie then makes it clear to Rand that he wants her and only her, which makes the yeoman feel very uneasy. Rand goes to the bridge and asks Kirk to make it clear to Charlie that a relationship between them is not appropriate. Calling Charlie to his quarters, Kirk takes pity on the young man and tries to help him deal with his angst by taking him to the ship's gymnasium for self-defense training. Initially refusing to participate, Charlie falls awkwardly and prompts laughter from Sam, Kirk's sparring partner. Humiliated and angry, Charlie makes Sam disappear, revealing his powers.


=== Act Three ===
Kirk immediately calls for security to escort Charlie back to his quarters, but Charlie resists, knocking down the two security officers with his powers. One of them draws his phaser, but Charlie makes it disappear. However, he finally agrees to go to his quarters after Kirk tells the young man that he will personally pick him up and take him there himself if he does not. After Charlie leaves, Kirk is informed by Uhura that all phasers on board the Enterprise have disappeared. Later, in the briefing room discussing Charlie's behavior to McCoy and Spock, Kirk speculates that Charlie might be a Thasian, given that his power matches descriptions of their unique abilities. However, McCoy disagrees due to his medical analysis indicating Charlie is a normal Human.

Charlie then enters and Kirk asks him outright if he was responsible for the Antares' destruction. Confronted, Charlie admits to destroying the Antares by making a warped baffle plate in its energy pile "go away". He defends his action by claiming that the ship would have blown up anyway, and that the crew weren't nice to him and tried to get rid of him. He leaves and Spock tells Kirk and McCoy, "We're in the hands of an adolescent."

Charlie, refusing to hide his powers any longer, usurps control of the Enterprise. He injures Uhura by making her communications console explode, preventing Kirk from sending a distress signal and causing Uhura to suffer second-degree burns on her hands, then forces Spock to recite Human poetry against his will (a comical moment meant to relieve some of the tension of the scene, at least for a second or two) when he tries to fix the damage. Charlie wants to go to Colony V, but Kirk refuses to take him knowing that the mayhem he would create in that unstructured setting would be far worse than what he's done so far on the Enterprise. The angry boy then begins his reign of terror. Passing Tina Lawton in the corridor, he turns her into an iguana. When he enters Rand's quarters with a pink rose - after he found out that pink was the yeoman's favorite color, Rand is in her nightdress and is shocked and angry that Charlie came in her room without knocking first. When Rand asks Charlie what he wants, he says he only wants her. Rand is able to turn on her personal viewfinder's communications. On the bridge, Kirk and Spock hear the conversation, and leave the bridge to rescue Yeoman Rand.


=== Act Four ===

Kirk and Spock rush to Rand's room and try to stop Charlie, but he throws them against the wall, and breaks Spock's legs in the process. A shocked and angry Rand slaps Charlie across the face, to which he responds by making her "go away". Charlie refuses to tell Kirk what he did to her. He then releases both Kirk and Spock after he realizes that he needs their help to run the Enterprise. Rigging a force field, the crew lures Charlie into an empty room and try to confine him, but he simply erases the whole portion of the wall powering the field. After threatening Kirk and Spock, he then takes out his anger on a lone female crewmember, whom he transforms into an old lady, and a group of laughing crew members whom he punishes by literally erasing their faces.

Knowing that Charlie won't be reasoned with any further, Kirk comes up with a last-ditch plan to "tax" the boy's abilities beyond their limit by luring him onto the bridge, where he mockingly sits in the captain's chair, and having Spock and McCoy turn on all of the ship's systems at once. As expected, Charlie quickly becomes overwhelmed and distracted as he tries to maintain control, and Kirk attacks him.
In the midst of the struggle, an intangible ship from Thasus appears. It is at this point that Charlie begs to stay with the Enterprise crew. A Thasian representative appears on the bridge as a green, translucent, wise-looking elderly Human male's face. The Thasian says they have restored the Enterprise to normal, undoing all the damage caused by Charlie; and then Yeoman Rand is returned, appearing on the bridge, looking startled and confused. The Thasian goes on to explain to the bridge crew that his people had been intrigued by Charlie, and gifted him their powers so he could live. He expresses regret at the loss of the Antares, but reassures Kirk that his crew and ship have been fully restored to him.
Kirk insists that Charlie could learn not to use his power and live a normal Human life, but the Thasian counters that such a thing would be impossible, and in any case, the only way to rectify his people's mistake is to take Charlie with them, effectively stripping away his Humanity. Charlie again begs for his life, but Kirk and the crew simply watch as he vanishes into nothing. Uhura reports that the Thasian ship has departed. A tearful Rand moves instinctively close to Kirk, who takes his place in the captain's chair. As she leans on the chair, Kirk laments, "It's all right, Yeoman. It's all over now." McCoy leads Rand from the bridge to her room as the Enterprise moves on in space.


== Log entries ==
Captain's log, USS Enterprise (NCC-1701), 2266


== Memorable quotes ==
"You keep interrupting, Mr. Evans. That's considered wrong."

- Kirk, to Charlie upon his arrival on the Enterprise

"Is that a girl?"
"That's a girl."

- Charlie and Kirk, on Rand

"There's no right way to hit a woman."

- Kirk to Charlie, on slapping Rand's bottom

"If I had the whole universe, I'd give it to you. When I see you, I feel like I'm hungry all over. Hungry. Do you know how that feels?"

- Charlie, to Rand

"Charlie, there are a million things in this universe you can have and there are a million things you can't have. It's no fun facing that, but that's the way things are."

- Kirk, to Charlie

"Sir, I put meatloaf in the ovens. There's turkeys in there now. Real turkeys."

- Enterprise chef, to Kirk

"He's a boy in a man's body, trying to be an adult with the adolescence in him getting in the way."

- Kirk, on Charlie

"There's a – Tyger, tyger, burning bright, in the forest of the night."

- Spock under Charlie's control, reciting William Blake's "The Tyger"

"I'm trying to – Saturn rings around my head, don a robe that's Martian red."

- Spock, still under Charlie's control

"Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary." 
"Very nice, Mister Ears."

- Spock and Charlie, as Spock recites Edgar Allen Poe's "The Raven"

"Growing up isn't so much. I'm not a man, and I can do anything! You can't."

- Charlie to Kirk, after Rand vanishes

"Yeoman Rand? Is she dead, gone, destroyed?"
"I won't tell you."

- Kirk and Charlie

"I've waited long enough. I'm going to take him on!"

- Kirk, referring to Charlie

"I can make you all go away... anytime I want to!"

- Charlie to the bridge crew

"Don't let them take me... I – I can't even TOUCH them!"

- Charlie, pleading with the Thasians

"I want to stay...stay...stay...stay..."

- Charlie's last words


== Background information ==


=== Production timeline ===
Original story premise in Star Trek is...: 11 March 1964
Story outline "Charlie Is God" by Gene Roddenberry: 23 April 1964
Revised story outline: 28 August 1964
Story outline "Charlie X" by Gene Roddenberry: 14 April 1966
Story outline by Gene Roddenberry: 23 April 1966
Story outline by D.C. Fontana: 27 April 1966
Revised outline: 9 May 1966
First draft teleplay by Fontana: 6 June 1966
Second draft teleplay: 27 June 1966
Staff rewrite: 30 June 1966
Final draft teleplay by Gene Roddenberry: 5 July 1966
Additional revisions: 11 July 1966, 13 July 1966
Filmed: 11 July 1966 – 19 July 1966
Day 1 – 11 July 1966, Monday (Half Day) – Desilu Stage 9: Int. Sickbay, Kirk's quarters
Day 2 – 12 July 1966, Tuesday – Desilu Stage 9: Int. Corridors, Bridge
Day 3 – 13 July 1966, Wednesday – Desilu Stage 9: Int. Bridge
Day 4 – 14 July 1966, Thursday – Desilu Stage 9: Int. Recreation room (redress of Briefing room)
Day 5 – 15 July 1966, Friday – Desilu Stage 9: Int. Transporter room, Janice Rand's quarters
Day 6 – 18 July 1966, Monday – Desilu Stage 9: Int. Briefing room, Gymnasium (redress of Engineering)
Day 7 – 19 July 1966, Tuesday – Desilu Stage 9: Int. Corridors (including Brig), Tie-down vfx shot of Abraham Sofaer
Score recording: 29 August 1966
Original airdate: 15 September 1966
Repeated: 1 June 1967
First UK airdate (on BBC1): 13 September 1969


=== Story and production ===
Gene Roddenberry had written a one-sentence synopsis of this episode on the first page of his original series outline for Star Trek under the title "The Day Charlie Became God." The page is reproduced in the Herbert F. Solow/Robert H. Justman volume Inside Star Trek: The Real Story, p. 125. Writer Dorothy Fontana also confirmed that the episode was based on that story idea. Fontana developed the story and wrote the teleplay, but Roddenberry received story credit. [1]
This episode was originally scheduled to air further into the season, as all action took place aboard the Enterprise, and it was basically a teenage melodrama set in the space age, both of which elements NBC disliked. However, as it required no new outer space visual effects shots (actually all Enterprise shots are recycled from the two pilots), its post-production took less time than other episodes. It was chosen to be the second episode to air, out of necessity, as no other episodes were ready for the deadline. The Antares was originally to be shown on screen, but when the early airdate was commissioned, this was eliminated. (These Are the Voyages: TOS Season One, p. 201)
"Charlie X" was adapted for a novelization by James Blish. It was published in the first Bantam Books Star Trek novelization collection in 1967 under the name "Charlie's Law". (This name is a pun on Charles' Law, a law of physics dealing with how changes in temperature affect the volume of a gas. (citation needed • edit))
The opening credits of this episode are the same as those used in "The Man Trap", which included a "Created by Gene Roddenberry" credit. The credits at the close of the episode only list Roddenberry as Producer. Also, the credits for William Shatner and Leonard Nimoy are missing the "starring" and "also starring" designations. This episode followed "The Man Trap" in airdate order. The main titles were standardized for syndication, however the DVD prints restore the titles to their original configuration.
During the first-season episodes, cinematographer Jerry Finnerman was encouraged to maximize placement of colored background lighting to add exotic warmth to the gray walls of the Enterprise set. This was a major promotional point for NBC, as Star Trek was a selling point for color televisions. But as pressure to complete episodes grew, this touch gradually faded from the series. NBC was owned at the time by RCA, a major manufacturer of color television sets. (Inside Star Trek, p. 113)
This episode was directed by Lawrence Dobkin, who later guest-starred as Ambassador Kell in TNG: "The Mind's Eye".
DS9 writer/producer Ira Steven Behr says that this is the episode that "won him over." (AOL chat, 1997)


=== Performers ===
James Doohan (Scott) and George Takei (Sulu) do not appear in this episode, although two words of Takei's dialogue from "The Man Trap" are dubbed in when Kirk calls the bridge from the gymnasium.
The galley chef was voiced by Gene Roddenberry, in his first and only acting role in Star Trek. Despite having dialogue, Roddenberry remained uncredited on-screen.
In her autobiography, Grace Lee Whitney mentions that Robert Walker, (a method actor), completely avoided the cast on the set, trying to stay alone and "in character". "He explained to us when he arrived to the set that he wanted to remain alien and apart from us – and it worked. You can see it in his performance, a subtle yet persistent air of estrangement from the Enterprise crew, and indeed from the rest of Humanity. His careful effort to stay in character added a convincing dimension to his performance." Furthermore, she added, "It's impossible to imagine anyone else in the role – he captured the perfect balance, projecting vulnerability, innocence and horrifying menace all the same time. A lesser actor could not have handled the range and depth of the character." (The Longest Trek: My Tour of the Galaxy, pp. 98-99)
Fontana also praised Walker's performance, "[He] was excellent as Charlie. And he was quite a young man, he was in his twenties, but playing a teenager, he looked young enough to pull it off." [2]
Allan Asherman, in The Star Trek Compendium, also mentions that Walker "turns in a powerful and fascinating performance". (p. 39)
The role of Sam was to be initially played by Beau Vandenecker, but it was eventually recast to Robert Herron. (Per casting sheet) Herron was a stuntman, so it was cheaper to hire him  as an actor/stuntman.
Although it may not canonically represent the creative staff's intentions, the novelization by James Blish in Star Trek 1 identifies the unnamed crewman named Sam (whom Charlie "disposes" of) as Sam Ellis, an officer on McCoy's medical staff. The episode novelization made it clear that he, along with all of the officers who were disfigured of by Charlie, were "restored" along with Rand when the Thasians intervened. However, the USS Antares could not be saved because, as the Thasian explained, it was destroyed "in this frame" whereas the zapped Enterprise personnel were "kept intact in the next frame."
This was one of only three episodes of the first season that didn't show Vina in the last closing still. The other two episodes were "What Are Little Girls Made Of?" and "Dagger of the Mind".


=== Sets ===
This is the first of six original series episodes that takes place entirely aboard the Enterprise. The others are "The Changeling", "Journey to Babel" (Babel itself is never seen), "Elaan of Troyius", "Is There in Truth No Beauty?", and "Let That Be Your Last Battlefield". "The Doomsday Machine", "The Ultimate Computer", "The Immunity Syndrome", and "The Tholian Web" were also filmed using only the Enterprise sets, including that of the shuttlecraft interior, but some of the action in these episodes took place on other Constitution-class starships. By any reasonable definition, each of these entries qualifies as a bottle show.
The grates in the floors of the corridors disappeared in later episodes. In one scene, Charlie takes great delight in watching a technician lower some tubing into one of these floor grates.
During the scene in Rand's quarters, when Charlie flings Kirk and Spock against the wall, the wall clearly has a hole punched in it. On an earlier take, Leonard Nimoy had struck the wall too forcefully.
When Kirk and Charlie have their final confrontation, the camera moves to a rare floor-level view of the bridge. This close-up shows that the set is carpeted. This was probably done as a noise-absorber, given the propensity of the set to pick up noises like plumbing and squeaking floors. The material itself is Ozite, a portion of which was sold at the Profiles in History Star Trek auction in June 2002.
The ship's gymnasium makes its first and only appearance in the series. It was originally intended to be seen in more episodes, as some of the shots showing acrobatics and gymnastics there were filmed as intended stock footage for reuse later. The gymnasium was a redress of the engineering set. The room where the gymnasts are tumbling is the redecorated briefing room.
The bench on which Sam was sitting when he was zapped turned up later in other episodes. In "Court Martial", it held the wrench that Benjamin Finney snatched in his attempt to club Kirk. In "This Side of Paradise", it was topped off by the metal tray that Spock grabs during his fight with Kirk in the transporter room.


=== Props and special effects ===
This is the only episode shot after the pilots to have no exterior views of the Enterprise using the updated "series" model. All of the shots are footage from "The Cage" and "Where No Man Has Gone Before" (see: above).
Publicity stills of Grace Lee Whitney were used on the playing cards Charlie modifies. (The Star Trek Compendium, p. 39)
After Charlie transforms Tina Lawton into an iguana, the noise the reptile makes was that of the sound made by Sylvia and Korob when they returned to their true forms at the end of "Catspaw".
Spock's scanners in this episode make the same sound the Metron transmission does in "Arena".
Like Trelane, Apollo, and the Gorgan, (other advanced beings whose powers threatened the crew) Charlie makes his exit with fading repetition of his final words.
The music accompanying Charlie's disappearance at the end of this episode, highlighted by a mournful bassoon dirge, was re-used effectively in "Space Seed" as the landing party beams onto the Botany Bay; in "Patterns of Force" for the death of John Gill; in "The Tholian Web" as Chekov witnesses the dead engineering crew on the Defiant; as Kirk wanders the empty corridors of the faux-Enterprise early in "The Mark of Gideon"; and in "The Ultimate Computer" during Daystrom's final conversation with his M-5 computer.


=== Costumes ===
Charlie comes on board the Enterprise wearing a patched cloak; he later leaves it on the floor beside a Jefferies tube.
Charlie and the crew of the Antares are wearing old turtleneck uniforms left over from the two pilots. Also, when Charlie is causing panic on the corridors, crewmen can be seen wearing the new series shirts with old, pilot version trousers and boots. (The Star Trek Compendium, p. 39)
For most of the episode, Charlie wears a gold wraparound jacket, which appears to be an unused, early version of Kirk's green tunic made for "The Enemy Within". It is apparently too big for him. (The Star Trek Compendium, p. 39)
After this episode William Shatner only wore tights once more, in "Errand of Mercy". He later poked fun at his costume in this episode when clips of it were shown as part of the History Channel show, How William Shatner Changed the World.


=== Continuity ===
According to Kirk's line "On Earth today it's Thanksgiving", the beginning of this episode takes place on 22 November 2266 (assuming American Thanksgiving is meant). The reference to Thanksgiving was included in the script because originally the episode was supposed to air in late-November. (These Are the Voyages: TOS Season One (page number? • edit))
Still not firmly set in his characterization in this early episode, Spock shows both irritation and amusement as Uhura makes fun of him. It seems that he has learned how to express irritation ("Ah yes, one of your Earth emotions") fairly quickly since the events of "Where No Man Has Gone Before".
The United Earth Space Probe Agency is referenced for the first time in this episode, with the acronym "UESPA". It was mentioned again in episode "Tomorrow is Yesterday". Years later, Star Trek: Enterprise referenced UESPA in several episodes, including "Demons".
The line "Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered weak and weary" spoken by Spock while under Charlie's influence is the first line of the poem "The Raven", by Edgar Allan Poe. Spock is also forced to quote some lines from "The Tyger" by William Blake when he shouts that there is a "Tyger, Tyger burning bright, in the forests of the night". [3]. In a later episode "Plato's Stepchildren" Spock is again forced to show emotion and sing "Maiden Wine" by powerful mind power aliens.
The song that Uhura sings to Spock and then Charlie may have been taken from an old Scottish folk song penned by Robert Burns called "Charlie, He's My Darling". The chorus in that song is almost identical to what Uhura sings. [4]
The crew compliment of the Enterprise is stated as 428.


=== Script vs. screen ===
The first-draft script featured Uhura as a trained mimic, who amused crewmembers by parodying her fellow officers in the recreation room. It was later turned into her performing a song, to fit Nichelle Nichols' musical talents. (The Star Trek Compendium, p. 38)
The second draft of this episode's script was completed on 27 June 1966, with the final draft coming in on 5 July. The episode itself was filmed in mid-July.
The final draft script called for the Antares to be seen, dwarfed by the Enterprise. [5]
A strange bit of dialogue present in the teleplay was cut from the episode: when discussing the possible existence of Thasians, and Kirk's possible father-figure behavior to Charlie, Spock satirically asked McCoy, "Shall I schedule you to give him voodoo and superstition lessons, doctor?" McCoy replied, "You can if he provides his own chicken's teeth and penguin feathers," to which Spock told him, "I'll see to it, doctor." [6]
In the final draft script, a remnant of Uhura's mimicking of other crewmembers still remained; just before she sang, Rand suggested to her, "Do someone. Do the Captain," but Uhura replied, "No, I've done him. Someone else... let's see..." It was then that Uhura started singing about Spock.
In the final draft script, the card trick Charlie plays with Janice, which reveals her photograph on the cards, was not specified. The script simply stated that Charlie performed a variety of card tricks which amazed Janice and the onlookers. [7]
Writer Dorothy Fontana recalled that the filmed episode was basically the same as her screenplay, "There were a few line changes, not much. The images of how Charlie affected people, you know, no face so a woman couldn't talk, things like that, those were all there [...] I noticed there really wasn't that much that was changed, it was pretty much the way I wrote it." [8]


=== Preview ===
The preview contains an edited Captain's Log from the finished episode: "Captain's log, stardate 1533.7. We have taken aboard an unusual passenger... the sole survivor of a transport crash fourteen years ago."
An alternate take of Charlie throwing Spock and Kirk against the wall in Yeoman Rand's quarters is included. The hole in the wall is still visible (Nimoy apparently hitting it too hard on a prior take or rehearsal), but while the final episode shows the start of the throw from the side, the preview shows it from the front.


=== Reception ===
Actress Grace Lee Whitney listed this episode as one of her three favorites. "'Charlie X' brought out another side of me, the woman looking at a younger man. That was also wonderful because I felt an allegiance to Captain Kirk." (Starlog #105, April 1986, p. 49)


=== Syndication cuts ===
During the syndication run of Star Trek, the following scenes were typically cut from broadcast. The remastered version of the episode contained all scenes from the original unsyndicated version.

Extended scenes from Charlie's beam-in to the Enterprise.
Scenes of crewmen working in the corridor, including a scene where Charlie observes two men saying "You've got a deal, friend". In the syndicated version, this was never explained where Charlie learned the expression or why he smacked Janice Rand on her rear when repeating.
Spock smiling while Uhura talks to him just before the musical session in the crewmen's lounge.
Kirk talking to Charlie in his cabin.
Women exercising in leotards when Charlie and Kirk enter the ship's gym. At the end of the gym scene, several additional tense moments were cut of Kirk demanding Charlie go to his quarters.
Extended briefing room discussion about Charlie and his abilities.
Additional scenes of Charlie angrily moving through the ship's corridor where he freezes a female crewman and shoves past three men; he also turns a young female crewman into an old woman.
Extended scenes on the bridge with Charlie pleading not to be returned to Thasia.
Extended scenes in Kirk's cabin where Kirk askes Charlie about the melted Chess pieces.


=== Apocrypha ===
A cat version of "Charlie X" was featured in Jenny Parks' 2017 book Star Trek Cats.


=== Remastered information ===
The remastered version of "Charlie X" aired in many North American markets during the weekend of 14 July 2007. The episode included new effects shots of the Thasian ship, replacing the blob-like object seen on-screen with a torpedo-shaped vessel. Most notably, the remastered episode opens with a shot featuring the Antares, a new design based upon the robot grain ships seen in the Star Trek: The Animated Series episode "More Tribbles, More Troubles".


=== Video and DVD releases ===
Original US Betamax/VHS release: 28 February 1985
Original UK VHS release (two-episode tapes, CIC Video): Volume 5, catalog number VHR 2250, release date unknown
US VHS release: 15 April 1994
UK re-release (three-episode tapes, CIC Video): Volume 1.3, 8 July 1996
Original US DVD release (single-disc): Volume 4, 19 October 1999
As part of the TOS Season 1 DVD collection
As part of the TOS Season 1 HD DVD collection
As part of the TOS Season 1 Blu-ray collection


== Links and references ==


=== Starring ===
William Shatner as Capt. Kirk


=== Also starring ===
Leonard Nimoy as Mr. Spock


=== Guest star ===
Robert Walker as Charles Evans


=== Featuring ===
DeForest Kelley as Dr. McCoy
Grace Lee Whitney as Yeoman Rand
Nichelle Nichols as Uhura
Charles J. Stewart as Captain Ramart
Dallas Mitchell as Nellis
Don Eitner as the Navigator
Patricia McNulty as Tina Lawton
John Bellah as Crewman I
Garland Thompson as Crewman II
And
Abraham Sofaer as "The Thasian"


=== Uncredited co-stars ===
William Blackburn as Hadley
Frank da Vinci as
Brent
Vinci (aka "Guard II")
Bobby Herron as Sam
John Lindesmith as the Helmsman
Robert Metz as Sciences crewman 2
Eddie Paskey as Leslie
Gene Roddenberry as the voice file info of the galley chef
George Takei as Sulu (voice only; recycled audio)
Ron Veto as Harrison (aka "Engineer")
Laura Wood as a Command crew woman 1 (old)
Unknown actors as
Bobby
Command crewman 1
Command crewman 2
Command crewman 3
Command lieutenant 1
galley chef
"Guard I"
Sciences crewman 1
Two crewmen in gymnasium
Unknown actresses as
Command crew woman 1
Command crew woman 2 (young)
Command crew woman 3
Command crew woman 4
Command crew woman 5
Command lieutenant 2
Command lieutenant 3
Command officer (gymnast)
Sciences crew woman 1
Sciences crew woman 2
Sciences crew woman 3
Two gymnasts


=== Stunt double ===
Loren Janes as the stunt double for William Shatner


=== Stand-ins ===
William Blackburn as the stand-in for DeForest Kelley
Frank da Vinci as the stand-in  for Leonard Nimoy
Jeannie Malone as the stand-in for Grace Lee Whitney
Eddie Paskey as the stand-in  for William Shatner


=== References ===
2249; 2252; 4-0; ability; ace; adolescence; adult; anger; answer; Antares; Antares-type; area; astrogator; astronaut; atmospheric system; authority; baffle plate; biology; black; body; "Bones"; bow; captain's chair; card trick; cargo vessel; castaway; Charlie's parents; Charlie's relatives; Charlie's transport; century; check; checkmate; chef; chess master; chess piece; chief; choice; city; Colony Alpha 5 (Colony 5, Earth Colony 5); Colony 5 governor; computer statistics; confined to quarters; Constitution-class decks; contact; coordinates; course; D channel; debris; deflectors; devil; door; dossier; duty; ear; earring; Earth; Earth history; Earthling; eating; effect; electronic clipboard; energy pile; entertainment tapes; evidence; exercise mat; exercise table; eye; falling; father image; female; first officer; fingers; flattery; floor; food concentrate; force field; forest; fracture; fruit; galley; guide; gymnasium; gymnastics; heart; home; Human; hunger; idea; iguana; immunity; Jefferies tube; judo; knocking; laser beacon; laughter; leg; legend; lesson; limb; logic; love; Martian; mathematic; meat loaf; memory banks; microtapes; million; mind; minute; mistake; mister; name; navigator; navigation console; neck; non-corporeal species; object; "Oh, On the Starship Enterprise"; one-way street; oven; passenger; perfume; phaser weapon; pink; playing card; Poe, Edgar Allan; poetry; power; present; probability; probe scanner; puberty; pugil stick; quadrant; quarters; range; "Raven, The"; record tapes; recreation room; risk; road; room; rose; rule; Satan; Saturn; "Saturn Rings"; Saurian brandy; schedule; science-probe vessel; section; sensors; ship's stores; shoulder roll; slap; society; solitaire; "sound of wind and limb"; space; starboard; status report; subspace frequency; subspace frequency three; subspace transmitter; survey ship; survivor; synthetic food; Thanksgiving; Thasian; Thasian ship; Thasus; thing; three-dimensional checkers; three-dimensional chess; toes; towel; training program; transmission; transmutation; transport ship; transporter chief; throw; turkey; "Tyger, The"; UESPA headquarters (United Earth Space Probe Agency); universe; vegetable; Vulcan lute; wardroom; white; wind; word; year; yeoman third class


=== Unreferenced material ===
Antarian metal chess pieces; bluejay; book; detention cell; chariot; Charlie's law; deck five; feathers; Ferndok; (gods); hell; helmet; hybrid; Jupiter; lab; librarian; library; meteoroids; microscope; pay; penguin; Phynburg Oscillating Framizam; rattle; Romulus and Remus; subspace radio; superstition; teeth; Tweedledum and Tweedledee; voodoo; Vulcan; wolf; "Wonderful One-Hoss Shay, The"; "Wynken, Blynken, and Nod"


== External links ==
"Charlie X" at Memory Beta, the wiki for licensed Star Trek works
"Charlie X" at Wikipedia
"Charlie X" at the Internet Movie Database
"Charlie X" at MissionLogPodcast.com