B'Avi was a Vulcan enlisted as a cadet in Starfleet's War College during the late 32nd century. He was a member of the Mugatos, the College's calica team, and was friends with Dzolo and Kyle Jokovich. B'Avi was a fan of the comic book Tales From the Frontier, which he credited for his decision to join the War College. He called it "a source of hope in darker days." (SA: "Vitus Reflux", "Come, Let's Away")
In 3195, B'Avi and Dzolo pranked the Starfleet Academy cadets by beaming them, in varying states of undress, from the locker room to random public locations. He also participated in an unsanctioned calica match between the Mugatos and the Academy team, the Laplings, during which he was punched by Darem Reymi. B'Avi and his comrades were later themselves victims of a prank by the Academy cadets, in which they used Vitus reflux to force the evacuation of the War College dormitories. (SA: "Vitus Reflux")
By midterms, B'Avi and Dzolo were engaged in a campus "turf war" with Darem Reymi. He was further dismayed to find him and a group of Academy cadets at The Academy nightclub, which they considered War College territory. As the night wore on, a bar fight broke out between the two sides over Jokovich dancing with Jay-Den Kraag. (SA: "Series Acclimation Mil")
Later that year, B'Avi participated in a training mission to the USS Miyazaki. He was assigned to the first shift of Blue Team, along with Caleb Mir, Kraag, SAM, and Jokovich, and tasked with restoring the Miyazaki's life support and main computer. Mir impressed B'Avi through the use of programmable matter to quickly get the job done. Soon after boarding the derelict starship, they were taken hostage by a band of Furies under N'Duwo Skra. When Skra chose B'Avi to be the first thrown out the airlock, team leader Lieutenant Commander Tomov sacrificed himself to give the cadets the chance to flee and barricade themselves on the bridge.
The team found the Miyazaki computer inoperable as it was still stuck on its final moments with the ship's original crew. B'Avi proposed using Tales From the Frontier to update its history, which enabled the computer to accept the cadets as its new crew and activate a force-field around the bridge, buying them more time against the Furies. When the Furies eventually broke through, B'Avi saved Mir's life by stepping in front of Skra's weapon, but was fatally shot. B'Avi's body was beamed back to the USS Athena, where his fellow cadets paid their respects; Jokovich laid an issue of his beloved Tales From the Frontier on his chest. (SA: "Come, Let's Away")
Over a month later, Jokovich was mentioned to still be struggling with his friend's death. Despite their differences, both Kraag and Reymi mourned B'Avi too with Reymi referring to him as a hero. (SA: "Ko'Zeine")