Lieutenant Commander Chu'lak was a Vulcan Starfleet science officer, born in 2278 in the S'Lara region. In the 2380s, he was the chief science officer of the USS Dauntless. (PRO: "Mindwalk")
Chu'lak was commissioned into Starfleet in 2355 as an ensign; his first assignment was under Captain Jason Stone on board the USS Strata. While his service was noted as having been exemplary, the Strata's CMO, Doctor Martin Rackham, noted that Chu'lak exhibited some possible psychological instability.
Chu'lak later served aboard the USS Grissom from 2365 to 2375. He was one of six survivors (out of a crew of 1,250) when the Grissom was destroyed by the Jem'Hadar in the Battle of Ricktor Prime. 
Following the destruction of the Grissom, Chu'lak was assigned to starbase Deep Space 9 under the command of Captain Benjamin Sisko. During his assignment aboard DS9, Chu'lak was assigned to quarters on habitat ring level D, room twelve. 
The loss of the Grissom and the deaths of his friends caused Chu'lak severe emotional problems. He obtained the replication pattern for a TR-116 rifle and modified it to include a micro-transporter and an exographic targeting sensor, which allowed him to kill from his quarters. He chose his victims if they had pictures of people showing any kind of emotion. He killed Hector Ilario, Greta Vanderweg, and Zim Brott before he was stopped by Lieutenant Ezri Dax. He claimed that he had committed his crimes because "logic demanded it." (DS9: "Field of Fire")


== Personnel file ==

His personnel file read as follows:

Chu'lak, Lt.
Science Officer / Vulcan, Born 2278: S'Lara region
Commissioned to Starfleet as an ensign in 2355, his first assignment was under Capt. Jason Stone aboard the geoterraforming vessel, USS Strata. His record since then has been exemplary, with the exception of a minor note by Strata's Chief Medical Officer, Dr. Martin Rackham, indicating some possible psychological instability.
Prior to his current assignment aboard Deep Space 9, Chu'Lak served aboard the Federation Starship Grissom since 2365. The vessel was destroyed in a battle with the Jem'Hadar at Ricktor Prime. Chu'Lak and five other crewmen were the only survivors.