Krinn was a male Vulcan and kingpin of the V'Lashi crime syndicate in the early 25th century. He specialized in high security infiltration, and was wanted for multiple counts of theft, racketeering, and murder across several star systems.


== History ==
Krinn grew up as a scavenger in District Seven on M'talas Prime alongside the Ferengi Sneed. The two considered themselves brothers and had sworn a blood oath of loyalty to each other. Despite his criminal lifestyle, Krinn professed to adhere to Vulcan logic, and had once even learned from a Vulcan master. He wore an IDIC pendant and had Vulcan script tattooed on his face. (PIC: "Imposters")


=== Criminal record ===
In 2401, Sneed's Starfleet criminal record identified "Krinn of Vulcan" among his known associates. (PIC: "Disengage")
Despite this, Starfleet Intelligence's record on Krinn at the time was sparse, with no image on file, and no information on planet of origin, species, date of birth, sex, etc. He was wanted by the M'Talas Prime authorities for grand larceny (case #11622) and by the Vulcan Ministry of Justice for breaking and entering (case #52200-VH) both in District Seven, another charge on Vulcan by the Ministry of Justice, theft (case #4687.8VF), racketeering, escaping from prison, and murder. In addition to his list of charges, Starfleet Intelligence did know he was associated with Sneed. 

That year, he was hired by renegade Changelings to help them break into Daystrom Station, for which he brokered for a device that could exploit the "illogical" flaws in the station's AI security system. The Changelings also hired Sneed to pin their theft of quantum tunneling technology from Daystrom on his and Krinn's mutual associate, the Romulan rebel Lurak T'Luco.
Months later, during an undercover investigation into the Daystrom Station theft, Worf killed Sneed to save the life of Commander Raffi Musiker. Worf then suggested that they use Sneed's death to draw Krinn into the open. However, Krinn saw through their ploy of using a mobile emitter to create a holographic decoy of Musiker, and captured them both. Krinn admitted to his and Sneed's involvement with the Changelings, before ordering Worf and Musiker to fight to the death for the amusement of his underlings. Musiker won by apparently killing Worf, which Krinn intended to use as leverage to recruit her into his organization.
Worf had in fact feigned death by using a Kahless technique to slow his heartbeat to imperceptibility, allowing him to ambush and slaughter Krinn's bodyguards. With Worf holding a knife to his throat, Krinn agreed it would be logical to accede to Musiker's demand to hand over the device used to break into Daystrom Station.
Elsewhere, Krinn's record was among the data collected by Commander Ro Laren pertaining to the Changeling infiltration of Starfleet. Expecting danger, Ro passed the files to Admiral Jean-Luc Picard aboard the USS Titan-A just before her death. (PIC: "Imposters")