Maj'el was a 24th century female Vulcan fourth year Starfleet cadet in 2385 who served on the USS Voyager-A and later the USS Prodigy.


== Biography ==


=== Academy years ===
As a Starfleet cadet, Maj'el was a member of Nova Squadron. (PRO: "Into the Breach, Part I", "Temporal Mechanics 101")


=== USS Voyager-A ===
In 2384, Maj'el was posted on the USS Voyager-A along with Zeph and Grom at the time that members of the former crew of the USS Protostar came onboard, on a mission assigned by Vice Admiral Kathryn Janeway. (PRO: "Into the Breach, Part I")
Maj'el was initially wary of the former Protostar crew. When she discovered them talking about a third shuttle bay on Voyager which only has 2 official shuttle bays, she and the others in Nova Squadron investigated. During Nova Squadron's investigation, Maj'el and several of the former Protostar crew boarded the Infinity, an experimental Federation ship. During a struggle, the group accidentally activated the Infinity's autopilot launch sequence, and the ship took off with them and flew through a wormhole. (PRO: "Into the Breach, Part II")


==== Time-travel to the future ====
The Infinity emerged from the wormhole and crashed on Solum in the year 2436. Upon realizing they had travelled to the future, Maj'el ordered the group to remove their uniforms as they aren't from this time, in order to comply with Starfleet's temporal displacement policy. The group was captured by Vau N'Akat and imprisoned along with Chakotay and Adreek-Hu – the only surviving members of the Protostar's original crew.
When Zero suggested that perhaps the group should break the Starfleet officers out, and perhaps their overall situation had always been a temporal causality loop, Maj'el notes that it's possible, listing previous examples of temporal causality loops involving Starfleet personnel.
After a successful jailbreak, events around the launch of the Protostar off of Solum did not unfold as expected, due to the group's presence in the future. On the Infinity, the computer displayed chronotron emissions and tachyon irregularities unlike anything that Maj'el had ever seen. She concluded that "The timeline has been disrupted. Wherever the Protostar went, it did not go to Tars Lamora." (PRO: "Who Saves the Saviors")
Upon realizing that Gwyn was in danger due to the disruption of the timeline, Zero and Maj'el worked to turn the Infinity into a time machine, in order to travel to the past and rescue Gwyn. After successfully time travelling to the past and temporarily stabilizing Gwyn, the Infinity was mysteriously restored to working order, and the group were able to leave Solum. While en route to Voyager, on the bridge, Maj'el told Zero that while this interlude had been unusual, Zero was the most logical in their band of misfits, which flustered Zero. (PRO: "Temporal Mechanics 101")


==== Return to the present ====
After returning to Voyager, Maj'el began hanging out with Nova Squadron again and ignored Zero's attempts to interact with her, something that she clearly felt guilty about. (PRO: "Observer's Paradox")
Not too long after returning to Voyager, Maj'el assisted the former Protostar crew by allowing them to escape from The Doctor, thus allowing them to reacquire the Infinity for their own plans. When Zero asked her why she assisted them, she responded that "it is important to help one's real friends...". (PRO: "Imposter Syndrome")
Soon after, Maj'el realized that the former Protostar crew had been replaced by holograms, and reported this to her superior officers. (PRO: "The Fast and the Curious", "Is There in Beauty No Truth?")


==== Recovering the Protostar ====
When Voyager tracked the Infinity to the ziggurat, Maj'el went on an away team to the surface and ignored Commander Tysess' orders to beam back to the ship when the Loom attacked. As a result, Maj'el nearly fell victim to the Loom before Dal defied Wesley Crusher's orders to allow Maj'el into their hiding place, Maj'el exposing their position to the Loom. The timely intervention of Voyager allowed Wesley to complete his calculations, which revealed that Maj'el was the important seventh variable in fixing the broken timeline and ending the temporal paradox. Maj'el joined the Protostar crew in traveling through a gateway opened by Wesley which led them to the temporally displaced Protostar and Chakotay. (PRO: "The Devourer of All Things, Part II")
On Ysida, Maj'el took part in the efforts to convince Chakotay to leave the planet and to fix the nearly powerless spaceship which involved sailing the Protostar across a vapor ocean to collect deuterium gas. The effort was ultimately successful, but the crew discovered that Voyager was over 3,000 light years away, meaning that they would have to build a new proto-core in order to reach it. (PRO: "Last Flight of the Protostar, Part I", "Last Flight of the Protostar, Part II")
Maj'el participated in the efforts to collect the bosonite needed to create a new proto-core and to deal with mutated tribbles. During the mission, Maj'el opened up to Gwyn about feeling guilty over the things that she had left behind. While Maj'el claimed that she wasn't concerned about the crew liking her or not, she was concerned about why she was with them, having left behind a promising future on Voyager because Wesley told her that Maj'el was essential to the Protostar crew's future. Gwyn reassured Maj'el that life and hope weren't logical, and while the path was currently unclear, it didn't mean that Maj'el would never find her purpose or that Gwyn would never go back to her homeworld to fix what she had abandoned. (PRO: "A Tribble Called Quest")
After successfully building a new proto-core, the Protostar jumped to Voyager, but inadvertently tore a hole in the weakened fabric of the universe, creating an interphasic rift that split the ship into multiple different alternate realities. After determining the problem, Maj'el was the one who came up with a solution to seal the rift using Voyager's deflector dish, but the crew was forced to have Thadiun Okona beam them to the bridge due to the rift's effects on Gwyn. The transporter malfunctioned, causing Maj'el to get separated from the others who landed in the mirror universe while Maj'el either remained behind or got sent to a different reality. However, after Gwyn sealed the rift using the ISS Voyager-A's deflector dish, Maj'el was returned to the correct Voyager along with everyone else. Maj'el called the experience "highly outrageous" after being reunited with her new friends. (PRO: "Cracked Mirror")


==== Defending Voyager ====
After returning to Voyager, Maj'el returned to Nova Squadron, but she invited Dal to train with them, despite Zeph and Grom's apprehension. (PRO: "Ascension, Part I")
When the Rev-1 attacked Voyager and the Protostar, Maj'el led Nova Squadron in defending the ship, with Dal replacing the injured Grom. Maj'el had Nova Squadron perform the Boothby Supernova, a move that no one had ever pulled off before, to use the Rev-1's own temporal weapon to destroy it. Upon returning to Voyager, Maj'el was embraced by an enthusiastic Rok and tested the sensory inputs on Zero's new containment suit. (PRO: "Ascension, Part I", "Ascension, Part II")


==== Battle of Solum ====
When the others embarked upon a mission to Solum to find and stop Asencia's time-space technology, Maj'el chose to join them, resigning from Nova Squadron as the mission was for non-Starfleet personnel only. She was motivated by the importance of the mission to Gwyn and to Starfleet and Wesley's urging that the seven had to stay together at all times. Although they succeeded in rescuing Wesley and Ilthuran, the group was captured by Asencia and her forces, and forced to fight a Loom. However, they were rescued by Janeway, Chakotay, The Doctor and Wesley. (PRO: "Brink", "Touch of Grey")
Maj'el worked with Wesley and Zero on the calculations to send the Protostar back to Tars Lamora and fix the broken timeline, and accompanied the ship through the wormhole. (PRO: "Ouroboros, Part I", "Ouroboros, Part II")


=== USS Prodigy ===
Alongside her friends, Maj'el received a field commission to the rank of ensign and a posting aboard the new USS Prodigy, now a training ship. Maj'el manned the forward-left console as the Prodigy embarked on its first mission (PRO: "Ouroboros, Part II")


== Relationships ==


=== Zero ===
Despite their rough start, (PRO: "Into the Breach, Part I", "Into the Breach, Part II") Zero and Maj'el quickly became good friends during the mission of the Infinity to the future thanks to their shared high intelligence and logic-oriented minds. (PRO: "Who Saves the Saviors", "Temporal Mechanics 101")
After returning to the USS Voyager-A, Maj'el shunned Zero and her other brief former shipmates in favor of her friends on Nova Squadron, although she expressed hesitation and remorse for her actions. Maj'el later made up for it by distracting The Doctor for Zero and the others, although they didn't include Maj'el in their plans to steal the Infinity and follow a mysterious message received by Gwyn. (PRO: "Observer's Paradox", "Imposter Syndrome")
Maj'el later cited her bond with Zero as a reason for going on the away mission to the time ziggurat, even deliberately disobeying direct orders to return to Voyager to continue the search on her own. Upon reuniting with Zero, Maj'el was both surprised and impressed with the Medusan's new corporeal form and she was discovered to be the missing seventh variable that would allow the USS Protostar crew to save the prime universe from destruction. (PRO: "The Devourer of All Things, Part II")
When Zero was forced back into a containment suit, Maj'el expressed concern for their safety and helped Zero experience the feeling of touch for the first time in their new form. (PRO: "Ascension, Part II")
Zero and Maj'el shared a Vulcan finger-touch at Starfleet Academy following the Battle of Solum, on First Contact Day. (PRO: "Ouroboros, Part II")


== Key dates ==
2384:
Field training on the USS Voyager-A
2385:
Resigns from Nova Squadron shortly before the Battle of Solum
Receives field commission to ensign
Assigned to the USS Prodigy