Sarek was a Vulcan elder who served as the ambassador to Earth during the 2240s and 2250s. He was married to a Human woman, Amanda Grayson, and was the father of Spock and Sybok.


== Biography ==


=== Early life ===
Sarek was born in 2165, the son of Skon. (TOS: "Journey to Babel"; Star Trek III: The Search for Spock; TNG: "Sarek") Sarek was willingly tutored by his own father. (TOS: "Journey to Babel") Sarek's first child, Sybok, was born to a Vulcan princess to whom he was apparently bonded with, but did not marry. (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier) 
During his childhood, he had a pet sehlat named I-Chaya. (TAS: "Yesteryear")

Three years into his marriage in 2230, while Sarek serving as Ambassador to Earth, the two were in the city of ShiKahr where Amanda gave birth to Sarek's second son, Spock. (TOS: "Journey to Babel"; TAS: "Yesteryear") Upon first holding him, Sarek remarked that the newborn Spock was "so Human." (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier) Sarek passed his pet sehlat I-Chaya on to Spock, and raised him and Sybok as brothers. (TAS: "Yesteryear"; Star Trek V: The Final Frontier; Star Trek)


=== Vulcan ambassador to Earth ===
Officially, Sarek stated that as ambassador, his "duty was to study and observe Human behavior" and that it was "logical" for him to marry Amanda to achieve this goal. This was his response when Spock, having been bullied about his own mixed heritage, asked Sarek why he had married Amanda. In actuality, Sarek had fallen in love with her.
Years later, Sarek served on the panel that accepted Spock to the Vulcan Science Academy. When another Vulcan on the panel insulted Spock about his mother, Spock declined the offer of admission. Sarek was shocked, sternly telling his son he had made a commitment to honor the Vulcan way.

Sarek was still on Vulcan when Nero dropped red matter into the planet's core, creating a black hole in the center of the planet. Spock beamed to the surface to rescue Sarek, Amanda, and the rest of the Vulcan Council. Sarek and two other members of the Vulcan Council made it to safety, but Sarek's wife, Amanda, was killed just before they were beamed off the planet. Sarek helped comfort Spock after the death of his mother, saying that he should not try to contain his anger, which he knew was exactly what she would've said in that situation. Recalling his response to the question raised by a bloody-lipped adolescent years earlier – that he thought it logical to marry her – he now told Spock that he did indeed love her. (Star Trek)


== Key dates ==
2165: Born to Skon
2227: Marries Amanda Grayson
2230: His second son, Spock, is born


== Memorable quotes ==
"As ambassador to Earth, it is my duty to observe and understand Human behavior."

- Sarek to Spock first reason on why he married Amanda Grayson. (Star Trek)

"Spock, you are fully capable of deciding your own destiny. The question you face is: which path will you choose? This is something only you can decide."

- Sarek to Spock on his future. (Star Trek)