Sarek was a male Vulcan from the planet Vulcan. He spent most of his life in service of the Vulcan people, as an ambassador and representative on the Federation Council. He was also well known as the father of noted Starfleet officer (and fellow diplomat) Spock, the foster father of the first Starfleet mutineer Michael Burnham, and the former husband of the Earth woman Amanda Grayson. (DIS: "The Vulcan Hello", "Battle at the Binary Stars", "Lethe"; TOS: "Journey to Babel"; TAS: "Yesteryear"; Star Trek III: The Search for Spock; Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home; Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country; TNG: "Sarek", "Unification I")


== Biography ==
The son of Skon, Sarek was born in 2165 and was willingly tutored by his own father. (Star Trek III: The Search for Spock; TNG: "Sarek"; TOS: "Journey to Babel") He had a pet sehlat named I-Chaya. (TAS: "Yesteryear")
Sarek's first child, Sybok, was conceived out of wedlock with a Vulcan princess. (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier; SNW: "The Serene Squall")
Sarek followed the teaching of his father and footsteps and became an ambassador. Later, while serving as ambassador to Earth, he wed a Human named Amanda Grayson in the late 2220s. (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier; TOS: "Journey to Babel"; TAS: "Yesteryear") A later recollection of Sarek's was that he had married her because, "at the time, it seemed the logical thing to do," but in actuality he loved her. (TOS: "Journey to Babel"; Star Trek)

Three years after their marriage, in 2230, the two were in the city of ShiKahr where Amanda gave birth to Sarek's second son, Spock. (TOS: "Journey to Babel"; TAS: "Yesteryear") In a vision, created by Sybok to manipulate Spock, upon first holding him, Sarek remarked that the newborn Spock was "so Human." (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier) Sarek passed his pet sehlat I-Chaya on to Spock, and raised him and Sybok as brothers. (TAS: "Yesteryear"; Star Trek V: The Final Frontier)

In 2237, when Spock was aged seven, Sarek was involved in arranging for him to wed T'Pring, later in life. (TOS: "Amok Time") Sarek also gave Spock his first lesson in computers. (TOS: "Journey to Babel") However, as a seven-year-old, Spock was occasionally bullied by Vulcan children who claimed that Sarek had brought shame to Vulcan by marrying a Human. (TAS: "Yesteryear")
In an alternate timeline created by the death of Spock at an early age, Sarek separated from Amanda Grayson, and did not remarry after Grayson died. Also he had been Federation ambassador to seventeen different planets between 2237 and 2269. (TAS: "Yesteryear")
When the Human parents of Michael Burnham were killed by Klingons, Sarek took her as a ward and raised her on Vulcan, where she became the first Human to ever attend the Vulcan Learning Center and the Vulcan Science Academy, the latter of which she entered in 2245. (DIS: "The Vulcan Hello", "The Butcher's Knife Cares Not for the Lamb's Cry") When Burnham was a child, the Learning Center was bombed by logic extremists and Burnham was rendered medically dead. Sarek came to her rescue and initiated a mind meld with Burnham, in order to revive her. As a result of this, a portion of Sarek's katra remained inside her mind, which later allowed him to communicate with her across interstellar distances. (DIS: "Battle at the Binary Stars", "Lethe")

After Burnham's graduation from the Vulcan Science Academy, Sarek was forced to choose between Burnham and Spock on who should join the Vulcan Expeditionary Group. Sarek chose Spock over Burnham for this; he then arranged with Captain Philippa Georgiou of the USS Shenzhou that Burnham would serve on her ship after graduation. In 2249, Sarek transported from Vulcan to the transporter room of the Shenzhou with Michael Burnham, and scolded her for being too rigid, refusing to follow Human niceties by giving her hand to Georgiou; quietly he told Burnham to "behave" just before he departed from the ship. (DIS: "Battle at the Binary Stars", "The Butcher's Knife Cares Not for the Lamb's Cry", "Lethe")
However, he later regretted his favor to Spock; the latter decided to apply to Starfleet Academy instead of the Vulcan Science Academy, whereas Sarek wanted Spock to follow his father's teachings, just as he himself had done. In 2250, Sarek broke off his relationship with Spock and, for years to come, the two were estranged. (TOS: "Journey to Babel")


=== Role in the Federation-Klingon War ===
Right before the Battle of the Binary Stars in 2256, Michael Burnham called Sarek over a subspace channel seeking information about how to handle the Klingons. Sarek narrated to her how the Vulcans had handled them after their first contact in 2016: by firing first, cautioning her this solution was unique to them. Further, he cautioned her from letting the fact that Klingons killed her parents affect her judgement. (DIS: "The Vulcan Hello")
During the Federation-Klingon War, Sarek travelled from Vulcan to a secret meeting on Cancri IV with a supposedly dissenting Klingon faction which could end the war. However, his Vulcan cruiser was disabled by the pilot V'Latak, who was actually one of the logic extremists and attempted to assassinate him by turning his own body into a bomb; though Sarek survived, the ship was disabled inside the Yridia Nebula. Gabriel Lorca of the USS Discovery launched an unauthorized rescue mission; Sarek was too injured to continue and Admiral Katrina Cornwell went in his place. However, the meeting was actually a trap orchestrated by Klingon General Kol to capture Sarek, and Cornwell was captured instead. (DIS: "Lethe")

In 2257, after the Discovery returned from the mirror universe, Sarek met the mirror counterpart of Philippa Georgiou, who offered her help with the war. Sarek and Cornwell (who had been liberated from her captors) wished all information regarding the crossover to be buried. He then negotiated with the Federation Council, received approval of Georgiou's plan, and it was decided that they had no choice but to proceed. (DIS: "The War Without, The War Within")
After the end of the war, Sarek, with Amanda, visited Paris for the victory celebrations, where they met with Michael, now reinstated as a commander and appointed science officer of the Discovery. (DIS: "Will You Take My Hand?")


=== Control crisis ===
After the appearance of the red bursts in 2257, Sarek left the Discovery to return to Vulcan and was assigned to the Federation task force investigating the mysterious signals. (DIS: "Brother")

After discovering Spock had disappeared in that same year, Sarek began to search diligently for him, to no avail. As it turned out, Spock had secretly returned to Vulcan, with Amanda hiding him in a sacred crypt and was shielded from telepathic searches due to the presence of Katra stones. When Burnham returned to Vulcan to join in the search for Spock, Amanda led her in secret to the crypt, but Sarek followed them in secret. Sarek confronted his wife about her deception and was able to convince them that the best course of action was to turn over Spock to Captain Leland. (DIS: "Light and Shadows")
Later that year, when the crew of the Discovery was planning to escape to the future as part of a plot to escape Control, Sarek was able to pinpoint the location of the Discovery using Burnham's katra. There, Sarek and Amanda said their goodbyes to Burnham, expressing their love for each other. Sarek agreed to look out for Spock, albeit from afar, at Burnham's request. Following this farewell, Sarek and Amanda returned to Vulcan. Following the Discovery's nine-century voyage, Sarek swore to never speak of Burnham or the Discovery again, using his status as an ambassador to avoid interrogation. (DIS: "Such Sweet Sorrow", "Such Sweet Sorrow, Part 2")


=== Reminisces by Spock ===
In 2266, his estranged son Spock was serving in Starfleet aboard the USS Enterprise. That year he noted Balok as being reminiscent of his father, even stating – at one point early in the first contact between the First Federation and the Enterprise – that he regretted not having learned more about Balok. (TOS: "The Corbomite Maneuver")

While affected by polywater intoxication later that year, Spock remembered that he had respected Sarek and their Vulcan traditions but had been ashamed of his Human blood. (TOS: "The Naked Time")
In 2267, while Captain James T. Kirk was attempting to aggravate Spock by making up false insults, he insisted that Sarek had been "a computer." (TOS: "This Side of Paradise") Later the same year, Spock evoked the authority of his father (as well as their male ancestors), while making an unsuccessful attempt to persuade T'Pau to prevent him battling Kirk in a kal-if-fee. (TOS: "Amok Time")


=== Coridan involvement and reconciliation ===

Sarek's accomplishments as an ambassador of the Federation included the Coridanite admission debate of 2268 before the Federation Council. Sarek's involvement in the Coridan admission debate included attending multiple council sessions, at least one of which was before the conference on a neutral planet. (TOS: "Journey to Babel")
Shortly before he left Vulcan with his wife and a group of aides, Sarek suffered two heart attacks. He did not inform his wife of these incidents, though his physician prescribed Benjisidrine for the condition. During the council session en route to the Babel Conference Sarek met and debated with Tellarite Ambassador Gav, winning their argument. He did not speak with Spock until Sarek survived a series of heart attacks and surgery, and they talked again only after a transfusion of rare T-negative blood from his son. This event resulted in a brief retirement and a rekindling of their relationship. (TOS: "Journey to Babel") The conference finalized the admittance of Coridan into the Federation. Despite several minor quarrels, Sarek cast the final vote in favor of Coridan's admittance. (TNG: "Sarek")

Sarek and Spock remained on good terms as the Klingon détente bloomed in the 2280s. In 2285, Sarek was briefed on Project Genesis and the report from James T. Kirk on the recent activation of the Genesis Device. That year Spock was left for dead on the Genesis Planet after sacrificing his life to save the USS Enterprise. Sarek, believing that Spock had put his katra in Kirk before he died, traveled to Earth to convince him to retrieve his son's body. It turned out it was Leonard McCoy who now possessed Spock's katra. On Vulcan, Sarek pushed for a fal-tor-pan, a fusion of Spock's katra and body; although aware of the dangers and complications of the ritual, Sarek stated that his logic was uncertain where his son was concerned. (Star Trek III: The Search for Spock)

Three months later, Sarek finally apologized to Spock for his original opposition to Spock's decision to join Starfleet, recognizing Spock's friends as people of good character. Sarek attended a meeting of the Federation Council that had put the Enterprise crew under accusation; he witnessed the controversy over the Genesis Device, especially the arguments from them that Kirk be extradited. Sarek defended the Enterprise, accusing the Klingon Ambassador that his navy had attacked the Enterprise, citing Kruge's attack on the USS Grissom and the death of Kirk's son; he was shocked that the ambassador proudly admitted his men indeed did so. (Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home)
In 2287, Sybok manipulated the starship USS Enterprise-A and reunited with his brother Spock. He caused an apparition in Spock's mind of his own birth; Spock saw his father holding him, commenting that the baby resembled a Human rather than a Vulcan. (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier)


=== Later career ===
Among Sarek's later accomplishments were his effort to bring about a Federation-Legaran treaty, which began in 2273, and concluded in 2367, early treaties with the Klingon Empire (Treaty of Alliance), and the Treaty of Alpha Cygnus IX. (TNG: "Sarek")

In 2293, Sarek suggested that Spock initiate negotiations for a proposed Federation-Klingon Alliance with Chancellor Gorkon, hoping to bring together the two lifelong enemies after the destruction of the Klingon moon Praxis. That almost didn't happen, for Gorkon was assassinated. Captain Kirk and Doctor Leonard McCoy were arrested by the Klingons, having been framed for the chancellor's murder. Sarek was present in the Federation President's office when several attempts to stop Kirk and McCoy being tried in Klingon territory were outlined, but he had to concede that the Klingons were within their legal rights and that the Federation could not interfere in their due process. Kirk and McCoy, with Spock's assistance, eventually escaped from imprisonment on Rura Penthe, and they arrived at the Khitomer Conference in time to prevent the assassination of the Federation President. (Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country) Afterwards, Sarek was involved with the Khitomer Accords, and further helped the Federation and Klingon Empire establish their almost one-hundred-year peaceful co-existence. (TNG: "Sarek")
Sometime after the Khitomer Conference, Spock left Starfleet and became an ambassador and representative of the Vulcans to the Federation. The two, however, split again over the Cardassian issue of the 24th century. Sarek was also dismissive of Spock's friendship with Romulan Senator Pardek, who he had met at Khitomer, and the prospects for a lasting Federation-Romulan peace. (TNG: "Unification I") By that time, Amanda had died, and Sarek had married another Human woman, named Perrin. Sarek was present at his son's wedding before they again stopped speaking to each other; it was at that event that Sarek first met Jean-Luc Picard. Soon after, Sarek studied Picard's career, describing his service record as "satisfactory", a choice of words Picard recognized as high praise from a Vulcan when he and Perrin later spoke of it. (TNG: "Sarek")


=== Later years ===

In 2366, Sarek was diagnosed with Bendii Syndrome en route to the Legaran Conference. As his emotional control became very weak, he mind melded with Captain Picard at the suggestion of his wife, Perrin. Sarek was then stable enough to conclude the negotiations for a treaty with the Legarans. He told Picard, "we shall always retain the best part of the other inside us." (TNG: "Sarek")
In 2368, Sarek was visited by Captain Picard. Picard, who had been assigned to investigate Ambassador Spock's disappearance, came to see Sarek and ask if he had any knowledge of a person Spock might contact on Romulus. During their brief conversation, Sarek regained a measure of control over himself and told the captain about Spock's Romulan friend Pardek. Before leaving, Captain Picard gave Sarek the traditional Vulcan salute and the first half of a phrase often accompanying it: "peace and long life." Sarek tried to respond but was overcome by his illness. Shortly thereafter, he died at the age of 203. (TNG: "Unification I")


== Legacy ==
When meeting with Ambassador Spock on Romulus, Picard learned that Spock and his father had never mind melded, and offered Spock the chance to share what Sarek had shared with him. The meld passed along Sarek's true feelings of love and admiration for his son that he had never allowed himself to convey in life. (TNG: "Unification II")
In 2370, after Julian Bashir told Elim Garak, "Before you can be loyal to another, you must be loyal to yourself," the Cardassian attributed the quote to Sarek, but it was actually Bashir's own. (DS9: "Profit and Loss")
The 24th century starship USS Sarek was presumably named in honor of Ambassador Sarek. (DS9: "Favor the Bold")


== Alternate timelines and realities ==
In the mirror universe, Sarek was member of a multi-species rebellion against the Terran Empire in 2257. (DIS: "The Wolf Inside")

In an alternate reality created by Nero's incursion, in 2258 Sarek was rescued by Spock when Vulcan was destroyed, but his wife Amanda Grayson was killed. (Star Trek)

In an alternate timeline where Humans ruled the totalitarian Confederation of Earth, Sarek served as director of the Vulcan Science Academy. According to Q, after an encounter with General Jean-Luc Picard, at some point before 2401, Sarek was "decapitated on the steps of the Vulcan Science Academy in front of a crowd that included his wife and son." Q found that to be a "nice touch." Sarek's skull was later mounted on display in General Picard's library at Château Picard. (PIC: "Penance")


== Key dates ==
2165: Born to Skon
2227: Marries Amanda Grayson
2230: His second son, Spock, is born
2237: Arranges for Spock to marry T'Pring
2240s: Takes Michael Burnham as his ward
2249: Transports Burnham to Captain Georgiou's care aboard the USS Shenzhou
2250: Becomes estranged from his son Spock
2256: Targeted by logic extremists en route to a peace meeting with the Klingon Empire on Cancri IV
2257: After Sarek's negotiations with the Federation Council, Georgiou's plan is passed. End of the Federation-Klingon War
2268: Reestablishes contact with Spock while en route to the Babel Conference aboard the USS Enterprise; survives a series of heart attacks and surgery, following a transfusion of rare T-negative blood from Spock
2273: Begins to make contact with the Legarans in order to start relations with the United Federation of Planets
2285: Appeals for the search and rescue of Spock
2286: Finally accepts Spock's decision to join Starfleet
2293: Becomes politically involved in Federation-Klingon relations, attending the Khitomer Conference
2366: Diagnosed with Bendii Syndrome; mind melds with Captain Picard to conclude negotiating a treaty with the Legarans
2368: Visited by Picard; dies on Vulcan at the age of 203


== Memorable quotes ==
"Isn't it unusual for a Vulcan to retire at your age? After all, You're only 102."
"102.437 precisely, doctor. Measured in your years. I... had... other concerns."

- McCoy and Sarek, discussing the latter's early retirement (TOS: "Journey to Babel")

"Tellarites do not argue for reasons. They simply argue."

- Sarek, rebuking Gav on his need to know Sarek's vote at the conference (TOS: "Journey to Babel")

"It does not require pride to ask that Spock be given the respect which is his due...not as my son, but as Spock."

- Sarek, to his wife, Amanda, after being accused of having pride in his son, Spock (TOS: "Journey to Babel")

"Threats are illogical. And payment is usually expensive."

- Sarek, after Gav threatens to make him pay for his accusations (TOS: "Journey to Babel")

"Emotional, isn't she?"
"She has always been that way."
"Indeed. Why did you marry her?"
"At the time, it seemed the logical thing to do."

- Spock and Sarek, teasing Amanda about her outburst (TOS: "Journey to Babel")

"What you seek has not been done since ages past, and then only in legend. Your request is not logical."
"Forgive me, T'Lar. My logic is uncertain where my son is concerned."

- T'Lar and Sarek, on the request of fal-tor-pan for Spock (Star Trek III: The Search for Spock)

"Kirk, I thank you. What you've done is – "
"What I've done, I had to do."
"But at what cost? Your ship. Your son."
"If I hadn't tried, the cost would have been my soul."

- Sarek and Kirk (Star Trek III: The Search for Spock)

"We demand the extradition of Kirk! We demand justice!"
"Klingon justice is a unique point of view, Mister President."

- Klingon Ambassador and Sarek on Kirk's extradition (Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home)

"Your vessel did destroy USS Grissom. Your men did kill Kirk's son. Do you deny these events?"
"We deny nothing. We have the right to preserve our race!"
"Do you have the right to commit murder?"

- Sarek and Klingon Ambassador, on the deaths of the Grissom crew and David Marcus (Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home)

"Your associates are people of good character."
"They are my friends."

- Sarek and Spock on the Enterprise crew (Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home)

"Do you have a message for your mother?"
"Yes. Tell her I feel fine."

- Sarek and Spock (Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home)

"These walls are too bright!"

- Sarek, on the Legaran's conference room on the Enterprise (TNG: "Sarek")

"I have been accused of many things in my life, never an excess of emotion."

- Sarek on being accused of showing emotions (TNG: "Sarek")

"I saw you crying."
"I did not cry."
"I was there, I saw the tears."
"You exaggerate, captain. I recall only one tear."
"So you were emotionally affected by the music."
"That is not possible."
"You still haven't answered my question, Sarek. Is it logical for a Vulcan to cry?"

- Picard and Sarek on Sarek's "crying" (TNG: "Sarek")

"The Legarans trust only me. They will not meet with any other member of the Federation. I must be allowed to complete my mission. There are no other logical solutions."

- Sarek (TNG: "Sarek")

"I will not be spoken to in such a manner!"
"Do I hear anger in your voice?"
"It would be illogical for a Vulcan to show anger! It would be illogical! Illogical! Illogical! Illogical!"

- Sarek and Picard (TNG: "Sarek")

"A mind-meld can be a terrible intimacy, captain."

- Sarek to Picard (TNG: "Sarek")

"My wife, you will leave me now. I require solitude."

- Sarek, to Perrin (TNG: "Sarek")

"No! It is... it is... wrong. It is wrong! A lifetime of discipline is washed away, and in its place... (laughs briefly then grunts) Bedlam... nothing but bedlam! I am so old! Nothing left but dry bones... and dead friends. Tired. Oh, so tired."

- Sarek, in Picard's mind shortly after the mind meld (TNG: "Sarek")

"I will take my leave of you now, Captain. I do not think we shall meet again."
"I hope you are wrong, Ambassador."
"We shall always retain the best part of the other inside us."
"I believe I have the better part of that bargain, Ambassador. Peace and long life."
"Live long and prosper."

- Sarek and Picard (TNG: "Sarek")

"Sarek, you will listen!"
"Go from me!!"
"Picard is here."
"No more chaos!! No more."
"I will leave you alone with him. He will either acknowledge you, or he won't."

- Perrin and Sarek near his death (TNG: "Unification I")

"Sarek, I have come a long way to see you."
"I will not answer!!"
"I must talk to you about your son."
"I wish no one with me!!"
"About Spock."

- Picard and Sarek (TNG: "Unification I")

"I never knew what Spock was doing. When he was a boy, he would disappear for days into the mountains. I asked him where he had gone, what he had done, he refused to tell me. I insisted that he tell me. He would not. I forbade him to go. He ignored me. I punished him. He endured it, silently. But always he returned to the mountains. One might as well ask the river not to run. But secretly I admired him, the proud core of him that would not yield."

- Sarek, about Spock (TNG: "Unification I")

"Sarek... We're a part of each other. I know that he has caused you pain. But I also know... that you love him."
"Tell him, Picard..."
[Sarek struggles to perform the Vulcan salute. Picard assists him, then returns the hand gesture]
"Peace and long life."
"Live long and... and... Live long and...[starts sobbing]
Spock... my son..."
"...and prosper."

- Jean-Luc Picard and Sarek's last moments together (TNG: "Unification I")