Captain Sokel was a Vulcan male who served as the commanding officer of the VCF Sh'vhal by 2381. He had a meditation lamp and a copy of the Kir'Shara in his quarters. 
Sokel frequently admonished one of his junior officers, T'Lyn, for performing needless tasks beyond the scope of her duties– such as enhancing sensors. Though he permitted the Sh'vhal to investigate when the enhanced sensors detected metreon particles in System 7743.8, Sokel ordered T'Lyn to spend two days in meditation due to her emotional behavior.
The Sh'vhal not only discovered that the metreon emissions had been caused by a Varuvian bomb detonated by Pakleds, but came across the Pakled Clumpship Pakled and the Klingon Bird of Prey Che'Ta' attacking the USS Cerritos. The Sh'vhal intervened and took fire from the Pakleds and Klingons, damaging its shields. T'Lyn offered Sokel a regenerative shield amplifier she had developed as a personal project. Though the protocol was untested, he implemented it, and shields rose to 120%. The Che'Ta' broke off its attack, and the Sh'vhal helped the Cerritos drive off the Pakleds.
Though Sokel noted that T'Lyn's actions had likely saved the ship. he deemed her lack of emotional control as a liability and informed her that instead of having her returned to Vulcan as she expected, he had recommended that she be transferred to a Starfleet vessel, believing her instincts made her possibly a better fit to serve with Humans. Though T'Lyn protested what she saw as an unusually harsh punishment, he stated that his decision was final. (LD: "wej Duj")
When T'Lyn told Beckett Mariner what had brought her to the Cerritos, Mariner deemed Sokel's decision to have been unfair and illogical, something T'Lyn ended up agreeing with. While she had completed a message requesting Sokel to allow her to return to the Sh'vhal, she would decide against sending it in lieu of staying on the Cerritos for the time being. (LD: "Empathological Fallacies")
Later that year, Sokel was on the bridge when Badgey infected the Federation's subspace relay network, impacting the Sh'vahl's computers. (LD: "A Few Badgeys More")
Later, after hearing of the Cerritos' success in dismantling Nick Locarno's Nova Fleet, Sokel attempted to contact T'Lyn. She was certain his intent was to offer her a chance to transfer back, although T'Lyn ultimately declined by ignoring the transmission, proving that his initial assessment that Starfleet could be a better environment for her was correct. (LD: "Old Friends, New Planets")