Soval was the Vulcan ambassador to Earth from the 2120s to the 2150s.


== Early career ==
In the 2050s, Soval was a member of an occupation force sent to take Paan Mokar from the Andorians. He served as a low ranking intelligence officer in the southeast quadrant.
The last time Soval fired a weapon prior to an incident on Weytahn in 2152 was sometime in the early 2100s. (ENT: "Cease Fire")

Young Jonathan Archer knew that Soval had a ship in the 2120s, while asking his father, Henry Archer, if his ship would be bigger than "Ambassador Pointy's ship". (ENT: "Broken Bow")
By 2152, Soval had an impressive list of accomplishments in his service record. (ENT: "Shockwave")


== Diplomacy ==
Prior to being assigned to Earth, Soval was part of negotiations regarding the last accord between the Vulcans and the Andorians prior to 2152. During the work on the project, Shran gained a respect for him. (ENT: "Kir'Shara")
Soval lived on Earth since before 2124, which was for more than thirty years as of 2154. (ENT: "Awakening")
Soval was one of the greatest proponents of cautioning Earth's advancement into the galaxy. Jonathan Archer blamed Soval for holding back the warp five engine's development so much that his father, Henry Archer, died before his design became a reality.

Soval considered Captain Gardner to be the most suitable choice to captain Enterprise. However, the job eventually went to Captain Archer, whom Soval found "impulsive." (ENT: "Shadows of P'Jem")
After Klingon courier Klaang crash landed on Earth in 2151, Soval – along with two senior aides of his, T'Pol and Tos – recommended that Enterprise's launch be postponed, due to possible diplomatic repercussions involving Klaang. At Starfleet Medical, Soval also recommended taking the Klingon off life support and returning his corpse to Qo'noS; Admiral Maxwell Forrest ignored this recommendation, and decided this was a perfect opportunity to launch Enterprise. Soval offered the ship's crew use of the Vulcan database, under the condition that Enterprise take T'Pol along as a science officer. (ENT: "Broken Bow")
When the Vulcans monitored Enterprise docking with a v'tosh ka'tur vessel, the Vahklas, Soval was asked to pass on a message from a Vulcan High Command minister to Admiral Forrest, who passed it on to Captain Archer. The message was that Kov's father was dying and wished to contact him. (ENT: "Fusion")
Six months later, Soval informed Admiral Forrest that – due to Captain Archer having interfered at P'Jem, which had led to it subsequently being destroyed by the Andorians – Earth and Vulcan's joint fleet operations would be suspended.
Soval was also recalled to Vulcan for consultation. (ENT: "Shadows of P'Jem")
In 2152, after Enterprise was incorrectly deemed responsible for destroying the Paraagan colony, Soval recommended that Earth cease its deep-space exploration efforts for the next decade or two. However, Starfleet Command ignored this recommendation, as well, when it was discovered that a third party had sabotaged and framed Enterprise for the colony's destruction. (ENT: "Shockwave, Part II")
Later that year, when fighting once again broke out on the disputed planet Paan Mokar between Vulcan and Andorian forces, Shran asked the Vulcans to send "Archer" to help in the peace talks, as he was someone they trusted. The Vulcan High Command had Soval (as ambassador to Earth) contact Starfleet and Captain Archer. Soval and Sub-Commander Muroc met with Enterprise to relay the message. Soval was not particularly pleased to have Archer there, and was suspicious of why an Andorian would ask for him. But after some negotiating with Archer, he agreed to go down to the planet with him to meet with Shran (citing "the ball is in our court now," a Human phrase).

While attempting to land on Paan Mokar in a shuttle, the vehicle was shot down by renegade members of the Andorian forces, not working under Shran's orders. Although Soval suggested meeting up with the Vulcan forces, Archer insisted on heading towards Shran. Soon, they came under fire, and Soval was shot in the shoulder by an Andorian. T'Pol helped put his arm in a sling, and they sought cover. When Archer went to come up on the attackers from behind, he handed a phase-pistol to Soval and told him to give him cover. Soval, not having fired a weapon since the 2100s, was wary about it, but did so. Shortly after one of the Andorians firing on them was taken out, Soval and T'Pol were captured by the Andorian forces and taken to Shran, who had found Archer fighting with one of the renegade Andorians. Once the renegade Andorian, Tarah, was arrested, real peace talks began between Shran, Soval, T'Pol, Muroc and Archer, on Enterprise. Although they agreed that they didn't agree on much, they did settle that the talks would continue on Andoria. To celebrate, Shran insisted that they drink to it with Andorian ale. Although reluctant, Soval did not wish to offend Shran, and partook in the gesture. As T'Pol escorted the ambassador to the Vulcan ship, he pointed out to Captain Archer, regarding the situation, "Your presence here has not been... overly meddlesome." (ENT: "Cease Fire")
In 2153, Soval expressed skepticism regarding information Archer had gained from the Suliban about the Xindi and recommended against Enterprise undertaking a mission into the Delphic Expanse. He also tried to stop Sub-Commander T'Pol from joining the ship on its mission, once it became apparent that Captain Archer would not listen to him. (ENT: "The Expanse")
Upon Enterprise returning to Earth in 2154, Soval was on a board that investigated Captain Archer's mission in the Delphic Expanse. Soval reprimanded him for several concerns regarding the Vulcan ship Seleya, which Enterprise had encountered in the Expanse. One of Soval's many complaints was the fact that despite spending several hours in the ship's auxiliary control room, Archer never attempted to access the internal sensors or download the computer database, so that the panel could truly know what had happened aboard the ship. However, Soval thanked Archer for saving their region of the galaxy from the Sphere-Builders, as information T'Pol reported showed their space would have eventually consumed many more worlds, including Vulcan. While thanking Archer, Soval shakes his hand, both of which are out of character for a Vulcan. (ENT: "Home")

Later that year, Soval and Admiral Forrest were on Vulcan, discussing future relations between their two peoples. Soval was nearly killed when the United Earth Embassy on Vulcan was bombed; only Admiral Forrest taking action quickly saved Soval's life, at the cost of the admiral's own. Suspicious of the High Command claiming Syrrannite involvement in the bombing, Soval encouraged Captain Archer to pursue their own investigation and gave the captain his full support. Soval actively assisted Captain Archer and T'Pol in their mission to the Forge by providing them with information on the blind spots in the Vulcan Security Network so they transport in unnoticed. Soval later disclosed his ability as a mind melder when he melded with a comatose embassy guard, Corporal Askwith, in order to find out the identity of the bomber, later revealed to be Stel – the chief investigator of the Security Directorate. (ENT: "The Forge"). The meld, considered deviant in Vulcan society, prompted the High Command to strip Soval of his position as ambassador to Earth. (ENT: "Awakening")
After being dismissed from that role, he actively assisted Commander Tucker, who was commanding Enterprise in Captain Archer's absence, to uncover events that were unfolding and also manned the science station on the bridge of Enterprise NX-01 during the absence of T'Pol. (ENT: "Awakening", "Kir'Shara")

Soval then informed Commander Tucker of a plot, orchestrated by High Command Administrator V'Las, to use the Syrrannite crisis as a cover for a planned invasion of Andoria, despite a peace treaty signed two years previously. Since such an action could have led to interstellar conflict, Soval decided to warn the Andorians of the impending invasion. A skeptical Commander Shran, unable to believe that the distinguished ambassador would so easily betray his own government, kidnapped Soval from Enterprise and subjected him to mental torture that lowered his emotional threshold in order to confirm his story. Soval's insistence and a few warning shots from Enterprise persuaded Shran to return Soval and advise the Andorian Imperial Guard of Vulcan movements based on Soval's data. (ENT: "Awakening")
With the element of surprise gone, the Vulcan invasion force met stiff resistance from the Andorians and Enterprise, giving enough time for the Kir'Shara to reach the Vulcan capital from Vulcan's Forge. Upon the activation of the Kir'Shara's writings, Administrator V'Las was relieved of his post and the invasion was stopped by Minister Kuvak. Soval later informed Captain Archer of the dissolution of the High Command and the less stringent policy to be adopted towards Earth. (ENT: "Kir'Shara")
Following T'Pau's ascension to administrator, Soval was reinstated as the Vulcan Ambassador to Earth. He was one of several Vulcan ambassadors who represented their people at an historic conference to discuss the formation of a "Coalition of Planets". He was the first ambassador to give a standing ovation to a speech delivered by Captain Archer and Nathan Samuels. (ENT: "Terra Prime")
Despite his attempts to constrain Starfleet's warp development, Soval later admitted that he had gained a respect for Earth and its people during his years on the planet. When Tucker sarcastically remarked that he'd done a very good job at hiding it, Soval took that as a compliment. (ENT: "Awakening")


== Alternate timelines ==

In 2155 of an alternate timeline in which Earth was destroyed, Soval tried to persuade T'Pol to return to Vulcan with him. She refused, staying loyal to her crewmates. (ENT: "Twilight")


== Personality ==
As an Ambassador and diplomat, Soval is often straightforward in his approach, holding nothing back. Even when negotiating with the Andorians, Soval was always honest with them, something that earned him the trust and respect of Shran who hated Vulcans. (ENT: "Kir'Shara")
Soval was deeply opposed to Human expansion, feeling that they were not ready to the point that Captain Jonathan Archer blamed Soval for holding back Humanity. After the Broken Bow Incident, when Admiral Maxwell Forrest agreed to send the Enterprise NX-01 to bring Klaang home instead of taking him off of life-support, Soval actually became visibly angry, raising his voice at the Humans. As a result, Archer accused Soval of spending too much time around Humans, visibly offending him. He later agreed to give the Humans the Vulcan database in exchange for Sub-commander T'Pol being assigned as the Enterprise's science officer. (ENT: "Broken Bow") After the Xindi incident, Soval admitted that he had been wrong and in an uncommon gesture for a Vulcan, both thanked Archer and shook hands with him. (ENT: "Home") Soval later explains to Admiral Forrest that a great deal of the reason the Vulcans are unsure of what to do with Humans is due to the confusing abundance of traits present in the race. Forest realizes and Soval confirms that Vulcans are actually afraid of Humans as they remind the Vulcans too much of themselves, but had overcome the same issues in a shorter time. (ENT: "The Forge")
Despite his outwardly traditionalist mentality, Soval is revealed to have something of a rebellious side of his own as seen with his being an accomplished mind melder, something that was seen as deviant behavior on Vulcan at the time. While slipping classified information to Enterprise, he simply stated that all he saw was a Starfleet data module, adopting a Human-like deception. After being brought before the Vulcan High Command for his actions, Soval was openly confrontational with them. (ENT: "The Forge", "Awakening")
After the bombing of the United Earth Embassy and the death of Admiral Forrest saving Soval's life, he became more cooperative with the Humans, giving his full support to Archer's investigation and pointing out the flaws in the supposed truth behind the bombing. Soval provided Enterprise with classified information and used his mind melding abilities to help get to the truth, sacrificing his career in the process. When Commander Charles Tucker III questions Soval's motives, pointing out that he has never seemed to care much about Humans, Soval admits that he had actually developed an affinity for Earth and its people during his over thirty years of living on the planet. A surprised Trip comments that Soval did a pretty good job of hiding it which he takes as a compliment. Soval later warned the Andorians of the High Command's planned invasion of their homeworld in an effort to save both them and the Vulcans from the destruction it would cause to both species. (ENT: "The Forge", "Awakening", "Kir'Shara") During the Coalition of Planets summit, Soval led the delegates in applauding Archer's speech. (ENT: "Demons")
When Shran put Soval into a device that lowered his emotional threshold, Soval displayed a great deal of anger to the point that he lashed out at Shran's unwillingness to listen to the truth and to believe him despite their history and the fact that Soval was actually telling him the truth. Soval started to find the situation amusing, something that he admitted normally wouldn't happen if not for the device. After Shran was forced to return Soval, he expressed concern for his safety as well as remorse for his actions and admiration for Soval, stating that a lesser man would've just told Shran what he wanted to hear rather than withstand the torture as Soval did. (ENT: "Kir'Shara")


== Memorable quotes ==
"Listen to me, you're making a mistake!"
"When your logic doesn't work, you raise your voice? You've been on Earth too long."

- Soval and Archer on taking Klaang back to Qo'nos (ENT: "Broken Bow")

"They've been in space for six months and they've already destabilized an entire sector."

- Soval, on the crew of Enterprise. (ENT: "Shadows of P'Jem")

"What is their fixation with our ears?"
"I believe they're envious."

- Soval and T'Pol regarding Humans talking about Vulcans' ears. (ENT: "Cease Fire")

"Join me in a drink to celebrate our mutual dissatisfaction."
"Vulcans don't drink... but this occasion merits an exception."

- Shran and Soval (ENT: "Cease Fire")

"Captain, your presence here has not been... overly meddlesome."

- Soval, to Archer, before his departure. (ENT: "Cease Fire")

"Our Science Directorate has determined that time travel is impossible."

- Vulcan Ambassador Soval, to Captain Archer and Admiral Forrest (ENT: "The Expanse")

"Ambassador... I want to apologize for what I said to you the other day. I was out of line."
"Yes, you were."
"I'm glad we can finally agree on something."

- Archer and Soval (ENT: "Home")

"Captain... your actions, while being morally questionable, were necessary. I opposed your appointment as captain of Enterprise, but it's obvious now that I was wrong. T'Pol has told me that the Expanse would have someday encompassed hundreds of systems, including Vulcan. You've done a great service for both our worlds. Thank you."

- Soval, to Archer (ENT: "Home")

"We don't know what to do about Humans. Of all the species we've made contact with, yours is the only one we can't define. You have the arrogance of Andorians, the stubborn pride of Tellarites. One moment you're as driven by your emotions as Klingons, and the next you confound us by suddenly embracing logic!"
"I'm sure those qualities are found in every species."
"Not in such confusing abundance."

- Soval and Maxwell Forrest, in the halls of Earth's embassy on Vulcan. (ENT: "The Forge")

"Ambassador... are Vulcans afraid of Humans?"

(Soval answers with a slight nod)
"Why?"
"Because, there is one species you remind us of."
"Vulcans."

- Forrest and Soval (ENT: "The Forge")

"There are those on the High Command who wonder what Humans would achieve in the century to come, and they don't like the answer."
"We're not the Klingons. We only want to be your partners, to do what the nations of Earth have learned to do: to work together in common cause."

- Soval and Forrest, just before a bomb explodes in the embassy. (ENT: "The Forge")

"Your accomplishments have been noteworthy."
"They don't justify deception..."
"Deception has never been a stranger to this room."

- Minister Kuvak, Administrator V'Las, and Ambassador Soval (ENT: "Awakening")

"There's a great deal that needs to be said, Excellency, but no one's willing to listen."

- Ambassador Soval, to Administrator V'Las (ENT: "Awakening")

"Mind if I ask you something? Why are you doing this? I never got the impression that you cared that much about Humans. Seems like... you were always finding something new to complain about."
"I lived on Earth for more than 30 years, Commander. In that time I developed an affinity for your world and its people."
"You did a pretty good job of hiding it."
"Thank you."

- Commander Tucker and Ambassador Soval (ENT: "Awakening")

"How many warning shots do Vulcans usually fire?"
"None."

- Commander Tucker and Ambassador Soval after the Vulcan ships fired a shot that missed Enterprise by just 20 meters. (ENT: "Awakening")

"I'LL TEAR THE ANTENNAE FROM YOUR SKULL!!"

- Soval to Shran (ENT: "Kir'Shara")

"Open a channel."
"To who?"
"The nebula."

- Soval and Tucker (ENT: "Kir'Shara")

"Where is your fleet?!"
"Do you know the story of Nirak?"
"What?"
"He was a soldier who lived a long time ago. He was standing watch over the gates of the city of Gol and he saw a cloud on the horizon moving toward him. He thought it was a sandstorm, so he told no one. It was an army. They destroyed the city, but they let Nirak live. His name now means "fool" in our language, just as yours will in Andorian!"

- Commander Shran interrogating Soval, not believing his truthful answers. (ENT: "Kir'Shara")

"How do you feel, Captain?"
"Like a giant weight's been lifted."

- Soval and Archer, at the Vulcan High Command. (ENT: "Kir'Shara")