Spock – whose full name was generally considered unpronounceable by Humans – was a male Human/Vulcan hybrid who lived during the 23rd and 24th centuries, and who became one of the most distinguished and respected figures in the United Federation of Planets. (TOS: "This Side of Paradise", "Journey to Babel"; TNG: "Unification I", "Unification II"; VOY: "Alliances", "Endgame")
As a Starfleet officer in the 23rd century, Spock served aboard the starship USS Enterprise as science officer under Captain Christopher Pike, as first officer and science officer under Captain James T. Kirk, and as the commanding officer of the Enterprise during its tenure as a training ship. (TOS: "The Cage", "The Menagerie, Part I", "The Menagerie, Part II", "Where No Man Has Gone Before", "The Corbomite Maneuver"; DIS: "Brother", "If Memory Serves", "Such Sweet Sorrow, Part 2"; Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan)
In the 24th century, Spock became an adviser to the leadership of the Federation and a celebrated ambassador on their behalf. He disappeared in 2387 after saving the Federation from a supernova that destroyed Romulus and caused the creation of the alternate reality. Spock spent the remainder of his life in the alternate reality, eventually dying on New Vulcan after helping to guide his alternate self down the same path that he himself had taken. (TNG: "Unification I", "Unification II"; Star Trek; Star Trek Beyond)


== Childhood ==

Spock was born on January 6, 2230 in the city of Shi'Kahr on the planet Vulcan. His mother was Amanda Grayson, a Human school teacher, and his father, Sarek, was a Vulcan scientist and diplomat. (TOS: "The Corbomite Maneuver", "This Side of Paradise", "The Squire of Gothos", "Amok Time"; Star Trek V: The Final Frontier; Star Trek Beyond) Through his mother, he was a descendant of Arthur Conan Doyle. (Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country; SNW: "A Space Adventure Hour")

After his half-brother Sybok's mother died, Spock and Sybok were raised as brothers. (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier)
Spock's mixed parentage caused difficulties throughout his early life. His own father, despite having married a Human woman, was ambivalent about his son's half-Human nature at his birth. For her part, Amanda watched Spock's stiff-lipped anguish caused by torment at the hands of other Vulcan children who repeatedly attacked and teased him to provoke emotional responses, knowing that his "Human half" was suffering. (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier; Star Trek; TOS: "Journey to Babel"; TAS: "Yesteryear") Spock himself indicated that emotions confused him. (DIS: "Light and Shadows") As a child, he had a friend named Sovrek whose parents told him to no longer associate with Spock due to him being half-Human. In response, he ran away to the desert. Two days later, his father found him at the Plain of Blood, self-harming with a vantu blade in an attempt to excise his Human half. (SNW: "What Is Starfleet?")
When Spock was a child, he seemed to have fewer filters, and everything reached him. He also suffered from L'tak Terai, the Vulcan equivalent of dyslexia, which he had inherited from his mother. Amanda intervened early on to ensure that her son was able to work past his learning difficulties. As part of her efforts to assist him, Amanda read Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and Alice Through the Looking Glass to him. (TAS: "Once Upon a Planet"; DIS: "Context Is for Kings", "Light and Shadows")
As a child, Spock was betrothed to T'Pring in accordance with traditional Vulcan marriage procedure. (TOS: "Amok Time")

In 2237, at the age of seven, Spock decided prematurely, and without parental knowledge or approval, to undertake the kahs-wan in the Vulcan wilderness in an attempt to prove himself. His pet sehlat, I-Chaya, tagged along against his master's wishes and defended Spock from a le-matya. The intervention of an older cousin saved Spock from the le-matya but I-Chaya was left badly wounded. Faced with the choice of a painfully extended life or a peaceful release for I-Chaya, Spock logically opted for the latter. That decision marked his choice of following Surak's philosophies of logic and emotional control. In 2269, the accidental creation of an alternate timeline created a universe in which Spock was killed in his childhood. Using the Guardian of Forever, Spock returned to the Vulcan of his youth and assumed the role of Selek, the nearly-forgotten cousin who saved his life during the kahs-wan ordeal. (TAS: "Yesteryear")
Spock often disappeared into the mountains for days as a boy, refusing to tell his father where he had gone or what he had been doing. He ignored Sarek's forbiddance of his trips and silently endured punishment. (TNG: "Unification I")
After the apparent death of two Human scientists on Doctari Alpha, Sarek considered it his and Amanda's responsibility to take in the scientists' daughter, Michael Burnham. (DIS: "Battle at the Binary Stars", "The Red Angel", "Brother") Upon being introduced to his new foster sister and being told he was to teach her the ways of Vulcan, Spock was not very welcoming to her. Upon seeing Michael enter the house, he withdrew into his room and drew an image of a dragon-like monster with his computer tablet. He flung the image at her and it screamed at her, after which he shut his door to her. (DIS: "Brother")
Later, however, Spock became what Michael described as her "little shadow". After logic extremists bombed a Vulcan Learning Center targeting Michael, she resolved to run away from home, believing if the logic extremists could not get to her, they would target Spock. Spock confronted her as she tried to leave and tried to convince her to stay. Michael deliberately insulted Spock's parentage to drive him away from her, leaving Spock distraught as she fled. Michael was subsequently found after Spock told his parents where to find her, claiming this information was given to him in a vision from a being he called "the Red Angel". His parents assumed the Angel was a figment of his imagination and that Spock had used logic to pinpoint her direction, but he never wavered from the belief that the Angel was real. Michael's insult to Spock also caused a long-lasting change: He withdrew and lost trust in other people, and his openness vanished. Burnham later reached out many times to make amends, but Spock did not appear to be interested. (DIS: "Point of Light", "If Memory Serves")

After Michael's graduation from the Vulcan Science Academy, Sarek was forced to choose between Michael and Spock as to who should join the Vulcan Expeditionary Group. He chose Spock over Michael but came to regret this decision as Spock chose to join Starfleet instead. Sarek had given Spock his first lessons in computers and set him on a path of science. Therefore, Spock's preference to pursue a scientific career in Starfleet caused a rift between him and his father that kept them from speaking to each other for eighteen years. (TOS: "Journey to Babel"; DIS: "Lethe")


== Starfleet career ==


=== Starfleet Academy ===
During his time at Starfleet Academy, Spock had Onafuwa as his teacher for Fundamentals of Quantum Stochastics and several other advanced courses. He was commissioned as a Starfleet officer in 2250 with the serial number S 179-276 SP and held an A-7 computer expert classification. Later in life, he wrote a memoir about the challenges he faced at Starfleet Academy, titled The Many and the One. (PIC: "The Star Gazer"; ST: "Q&A"; TOS: "The Enterprise Incident", "Court Martial", "The Ultimate Computer")


=== Early postings and assignments ===
One of Spock's early assignments was to the USS Kongo. (SNW: "Memento Mori")


=== Service aboard the USS Enterprise ===


==== Arrival on the Enterprise ====

In 2253, Spock was assigned to the USS Enterprise under the command of Captain Christopher Pike. When Ensign Spock was first transported aboard the Enterprise, he bonded with the ship's first officer, Lieutenant Una Chin-Riley (who preferred to be known simply as "Number One"). When they became trapped in the turbolift while on their way to the bridge, Spock asked Una many questions and the two opened up to each other. (ST: "Q&A"; SNW: "Among the Lotus Eaters" display graphic)
By 2254, he was promoted to lieutenant. (TOS: "The Cage")


==== Rescuing Pike from the Talosians ====

Later that year, Spock was wounded in the leg when Pike's landing party was attacked on Rigel VII.
As the ship proceeded to the Vega colony for medical care, a radio wave distress call forced Pike to divert the ship to Talos IV. Still limping, Spock joined a landing party that transported to the barren surface of the planet where Talosians captured Pike. He was the first of the ship's crew to realize the Talosians had powerful illusory abilities. Spock's final report, along with Pike's, recommended a ban on visitation to the planet. Starfleet's General Order 7 supported that judgment. (TOS: "The Cage", "The Menagerie, Part I", "The Menagerie, Part II")


==== Searching for the Red Angel ====

Following the end of the Federation-Klingon War in 2257, Spock took an unspecified leave of absence from Starfleet. He had accumulated a number of months during the five-year mission which, according to Pike, took a toll on the whole crew as well as Spock. Upon reviewing Spock's personal log entries on the Enterprise, Michael Burnham learned that Spock had been having visions ever since he was a boy, and that he had had premonitions of the mysterious red bursts that the USS Discovery was likewise investigating, which Spock believed were related to his childhood visions of "the Red Angel". (DIS: "Brother")
Spock followed his visions to an unknown planet where he encountered the Red Angel. Through a mind meld, he discovered that it was a Human clad in a suit far beyond 23rd century technology. He also received a vision of the destruction of Earth, Vulcan, Andor, and Tellar, and began experiencing time non-linearly. (DIS: "If Memory Serves") He decided to have himself committed to the psychiatric unit on Starbase 5. In doing so, he requested that Starfleet not inform his family about the matter, including his father and foster sister. While there, he was observed to display acutely emotional dissociation and extreme empathy deficits. When he was told the red bursts had occurred as he had predicted, Spock broke out of the facility, disabling three of his doctors with Vulcan nerve pinches and fleeing on a shuttlecraft. (DIS: "New Eden", "Point of Light", "If Memory Serves")
Starfleet subsequently claimed that Spock had murdered his doctors and made finding him a priority. The USS Discovery and Section 31 became involved in the search. Aware he was being pursued, Spock abandoned his shuttlecraft in the Mutara sector and secretly returned to Vulcan. There, his mother hid him in a sacred crypt where katra stones shielded him from telepathic searches. Spock had become delusional and incoherent, unable to bear the experience of viewing time non-linearly, and repeated the First Doctrines of Logic and a sequence of numbers over and over. Burnham convinced Amanda to take her to Spock, but Sarek followed Burnham and convinced her that the best way to help Spock was to hand him over to Section 31. Burnham took Spock to the Section 31 ship NCIA-93 where Captain Leland promised he would help repair Spock's mind. However, Philippa Georgiou warned Burnham that Leland intended to extract Spock's memories using a process that would destroy his mind. At Georgiou's suggestion, Burnham overpowered her and took Spock from NCIA-93 in a shuttlecraft. (DIS: "Saints of Imperfection", "Light and Shadows")
Burnham realized that, since Spock's mind had regressed to childhood, the sequence of numbers he had been repeating was reversed due to his L'tak Terai. In the opposite order, the numbers represented the coordinates for Talos IV. Burnham thus set a course for that planet. There, the Talosians and Vina agreed to help heal Spock and subsequently projected illusions to the pursuing NCIA-93 to allow Burnham and Spock to escape to the USS Discovery, which was commanded by his friend Captain Pike while the USS Enterprise was down for repairs. (DIS: "Light and Shadows", "If Memory Serves")


==== Stopping Control ====
Spock subsequently joined the Discovery's ongoing mission to investigate the red bursts, discovering that Control had framed Spock for murder (DIS: "Project Daedalus") and helping to trap the Red Angel on Essof IV. To everyone's surprise, the Red Angel was revealed to actually be Gabrielle Burnham, Michael Burnham's mother who was long believed to be dead. While attempting to prevent Control from wiping out all life in the galaxy after gaining full sentience, Gabrielle had discovered that Spock was the only one capable of truly perceiving her and her purpose. However, an effort to beam Gabrielle into their time permanently failed and resulted in the Red Angel suit and Gabrielle getting pulled back into the 32nd century, unable to return due to Gabrielle's time crystal being destroyed. (DIS: "The Red Angel", "Perpetual Infinity")
When the decision was made to send Discovery into the future in order to prevent Control from ever getting its hands on the Sphere data, Spock decided to accompany his sister on the one-way trip. During the Battle near Xahea, Spock helped to guide Burnham's use of the second Red Angel suit from a shuttlecraft, but his engines were damaged and he couldn't return to the ship with her. With Discovery too badly damaged to risk lowering its shields to beam him onboard, Spock was forced to remain behind in 2257. Burnham promised to send the seventh red burst to signal her brother that they had successfully made it and offered him some final words of advice. Spock told Burnham that he loved her, a sentiment that she returned, before Spock had the USS Enterprise beam him out. From the Enterprise bridge, Spock witnessed Burnham successfully lead Discovery through the wormhole to the future. (DIS: "Such Sweet Sorrow", "Such Sweet Sorrow, Part 2")


==== Return to Starfleet ====

After the battle against Control, Spock returned to his position as science officer aboard the Enterprise in 2258. He was sworn to secrecy, along with the rest of the crew of Pike's starship, to never again speak the name of his adoptive sister or the ship she served on aloud in public again. Four months after the Discovery's departure, the seventh red burst appeared near Terralysium, confirming to Spock that his sister had made it to the future. (DIS: "Such Sweet Sorrow, Part 2")
In 2259, T'Pring, his betrothed, proposed marriage to him, which he accepted. (SNW: "Strange New Worlds")
Later that year, the pirate Captain Angel, lover of Spock's half-brother Sybok, came aboard, manipulating Spock at an attempt to free Sybok from the Ankeshtan K'til Retreat he was currently confined to. Angel ultimately took control of the Enterprise and tried to blackmail T'Pring into releasing Sybok, using Spock as leverage. Spock and Christine Chapel foiled her plans by pretending to be in love with each other and temporarily ending his betrothal to T'Pring. They renewed their bonding afterwards. (SNW: "The Serene Squall")
When an alien consciousness from the Jonisian Nebula brought the fairy tale The Kingdom of Elysian to life on the Enterprise, Spock was used for the character of the Wizard Pollux. He didn't remember the events after the ship was returned to normal. (SNW: "The Elysian Kingdom")
Spock was part of a mission to the USS Peregrine, which had made a crash landing on Valeo Beta V. Inside the ship, confronted with young Gorn who had just hatched and hunted the landing party, Spock allowed himself to give into his unchecked emotions and rage to provoke and draw out the Gorn. Afterwards, he had still trouble controlling his anger as well as his pain and that his mind was weak, but was assured by Christine Chapel that it was not a weakness, but him being Human. (SNW: "All Those Who Wander")


==== Meeting Leila Kalomi ====
On Earth briefly in 2261, Spock met Leila Kalomi. Although she declared a love for Spock, his emotional control prevented him from reciprocating until 2267 when he was infected by the spores on Omicron Ceti III. Under the spores' influence, he became peaceful and happy but Captain James T. Kirk infuriated him, which killed the spores and returned him to normal. (TOS: "This Side of Paradise")
Spock's service under Pike (eleven years, four months, and five days) inspired considerable respect and loyalty from the young officer. In 2267, Spock risked his life and career for the sake of his former captain. (TOS: "The Cage", "The Menagerie, Part I", "The Menagerie, Part II")
Sometime during his service aboard the Enterprise, he served as second officer. (Star Trek Beyond)


==== First officer of the USS Enterprise ====


===== Year One =====

After Pike's promotion to fleet captain, Kirk assumed command of the Enterprise in 2265, with Spock as his first officer. An early mission proved disastrous when Lieutenant Commander Gary Mitchell, a close friend of the new captain, developed enhanced psionic abilities when the Enterprise encountered an energy barrier at the edge of the Milky Way Galaxy.

Spock examined the tapes of an earlier ship, the SS Valiant, that had encountered the same barrier and was destroyed. As Mitchell's powers increased, Spock believed he had become extremely dangerous and feared that he would destroy the Enterprise. He therefore advised Kirk to either strand Mitchell on the uninhabited and desolate Delta Vega to isolate him from galactic civilization or kill Mitchell before it was too late. Kirk hesitated but initially attempted the former, but the scope of Spock's concerns were eventually borne out and Kirk was forced to kill Mitchell. (TOS: "Where No Man Has Gone Before")


===== Year Two =====
The Enterprise repelled the first Romulan incursion of Federation space in over a century on stardate 1709.2. Spock and the bridge crew became the first Starfleet officers to make visual contact with Romulans who finally revealed their Vulcan-like appearance to Starfleet. Lieutenant Stiles briefly suspected Spock of being a Romulan agent until Spock saved his life in the course of battle. (TOS: "Balance of Terror")


===== Year Three =====
Spock kidnapped Fleet Captain Pike and hijacked the Enterprise. Pike had been crippled and was confined to a wheelchair, unable to speak, as a result of an accident. Spock wanted to return him to Talos IV; he wished to return Pike to the Talosians there so he could enjoy the rest of his life in an illusory reality and would not have to continue enduring his disability. After a lengthy inquiry into the matter, and in light of the Talosian-provided images, Kirk allowed Pike to beam down. Commodore Jose I. Mendez also dropped all charges against Spock. (TOS: "The Menagerie, Part I", "The Menagerie, Part II")
While commanding an away mission aboard the Galileo on stardate 2821.5, the shuttlecraft crashed on the surface of Taurus II. Giant hostile creatures killed two crewmembers while the shuttle was stranded there. Spock, aided by Lieutenant Commander Montgomery Scott, eventually launched the shuttle. Knowing that it could not break free of the planet's gravity, Spock ignited the shuttlecraft's remaining fuel to use it as a flare. His gamble paid off; it alerted the Enterprise which turned around and rescued the team. (TOS: "The Galileo Seven")

After being thrown back in time to Earth of 1969 and interacting with that planet's US Air Force, Spock was able to recreate a time warp with a slingshot maneuver around the sun. (TOS: "Tomorrow is Yesterday")

When Kirk was court-martialed for causing the death of Lieutenant Commander Benjamin Finney, Spock proved that Finney had altered the Enterprise's computer tapes to frame Kirk, by beating the computer at chess four times in a row, something which would ordinarily be impossible. (TOS: "Court Martial")

Spock, along with Kirk, helped disable Landru, a computer that controlled the lives of a civilization on Beta III and allowed no free thought or creative thinking. (TOS: "The Return of the Archons")
Spock helped Kirk to retake the Enterprise after Khan Noonien Singh, a 20th century Augment dictator whom the Enterprise's crew had found in stasis, commandeered the starship. He flooded the ship with gas, disabling Khan and his followers. (TOS: "Space Seed")
On stardate 3192.1, Spock and Kirk were taken prisoners on Eminiar VII which had been at war for over five hundred years with Vendikar. Computers fought the war virtually so that the destruction of actual warfare did not devastate the two worlds, thus preserving both civilizations. Whenever the computer registered a hit, the affected citizens reported to a disintegration chamber where they were vaporized. When the Enterprise entered orbit around Eminiar VII, it became a legitimate target for Vendikar. The war computer soon declared that a tricobalt satellite explosion had destroyed the Enterprise; as a result, Eminiar officials expected the crew to report to the disintegration stations. They abducted Kirk and Spock to ensure compliance, but the two escaped captivity and destroyed the computers on Eminiar VII. With the threat of a real war looming over the inhabitants of both planets, Spock and Kirk negotiated a peace between Eminiar VII and Vendikar. (TOS: "A Taste of Armageddon")
On the mining planet Janus VI, an unknown creature was killing miners there. After locating the creature, Spock mind melded with it. He discovered that the creature was called a Horta and determined that its killing of the miners was an attempt to protect its young. The miners had been unintentionally killing the Horta's offspring by destroying silicon nodules which were really the creature's eggs. Spock negotiated a pact between the Horta and the miners: The miners would leave the eggs alone and the Horta, in turn, would help the miners locate valuable minerals. (TOS: "The Devil in the Dark")

Spock and Kirk later became trapped on Organia during a Klingon occupation of that planet. The Klingons wanted to use Organia as a base in their war against the Federation. The Organian council refused the Federation's help, and after the Klingons invaded and took control of Organia, Kirk and Spock had civilian identities imposed on them, with Spock being given the identity of a merchant. They then became involved in sabotage. After the Klingons captured them, the Organians set Spock and Kirk free. Just as war began to break out, the Organians revealed themselves to be powerful energy beings. They neutralized both sides weaponry and stopped the war. (TOS: "Errand of Mercy")
On stardate 3134.0, Spock and Kirk traveled back in time using the Guardian of Forever to retrieve Dr. Leonard McCoy who had entered the time portal and somehow changed history. Spock discovered McCoy saved the life of Edith Keeler who, in the altered timeline, led a pacifist movement that delayed the United States of America's entry into World War II, thus allowing Adolf Hitler to win the war. Spock persuaded Kirk that allowing Keeler to die in an auto accident was the only way to restore the timeline. (TOS: "The City on the Edge of Forever")

Near the end of the year, a Denevan neural parasite that destroyed the colony on Deneva also attacked Spock. He submitted to an experiment that destroyed the creature inside him but also left him blind. However, the blindness was only temporary due to an inner set of eyelids that all Vulcans possessed. (TOS: "Operation -- Annihilate!")

In late 2267, the Enterprise encountered a probe called Nomad that had destroyed multiple star systems and their inhabitants. Spock mind-melded with the probe and discovered it was an old Earth probe originally tasked with seeking out new life. Somehow damaged in space, it had merged with an alien probe on a mission to sterilize "imperfect" biological organisms from soil. These two missions had merged into sterilizing or improving anything that was not "perfect." Using its own logic against it, Kirk destroyed the probe. (TOS: "The Changeling")
On stardate 3219.8, an alien cloud creature took control of a shuttlecraft carrying Spock, Kirk, and Federation diplomat Nancy Hedford, landing it on a deserted planet. There, they found Zefram Cochrane, the inventor of Earth's warp drive who was believed to have died decades ago. The cloud creature, which Cochrane called the "Companion", had discovered him and kept him alive and young. The creature had brought the three Starfleet officers to be companions for Cochrane. When Spock tried to repair the shuttlecraft, the Companion stopped him. The situation was resolved when the Companion joined with Hedford, who was terminally ill, and cured her. Hedford/The Companion remained on the planet with Cochrane. (TOS: "Metamorphosis")


===== Year Four =====
At some point around Spock's fourth year on the Enterprise, he was offered an assignment with Medusan Ambassador Kollos which he turned down, as he claimed that he "was unable to accept," as his "life is here," aboard the Enterprise. The assignment, instead, went to Miranda Jones. (TOS: "Is There in Truth No Beauty?")
In 2268, Spock and other crewmembers of the Enterprise encountered Harry Mudd stranded on a planet of androids. The androids wanted the Enterprise to escape the planet and serve Humans so that they would not have to explore space. Kirk, Spock, and the rest of the crew eventually managed to overload the androids' central control by acting in a illogical manner, causing the chief android, Norman, to have a breakdown. (TOS: "I, Mudd")
While traveling to a peace conference on Babel, Spock was reunited with his parents. There was still much friction between Spock and his father. When Sarek was accused of the murder of another delegate, it was revealed that he was ill with a cardiac defect which made it unlikely that he could have committed the crime. McCoy was then tasked with performing surgery on Sarek while in a space battle with an enemy ship. It was then discovered that Orions were responsible for the murder, and Spock made himself available for a blood transfusion for his father's surgery because they shared the same rare blood type, T-negative. Recovering in sickbay, Sarek and Spock made peace with each other, even playfully teasing Amanda. (TOS: "Journey to Babel")
On stardate 4523.3, Spock helped foil a Klingon plot to poison quadrotriticale earmarked for Sherman's Planet while at the same time trying to clear the Enterprise of a fast-breeding alien species called tribbles. (TOS: "The Trouble with Tribbles"; DS9: "Trials and Tribble-ations")
Spock later visited Sigma Iotia II whose inhabitants had modeled their society on the gangster era of Earth's 1930s. An earlier starship had left behind a book about gangsters from Earth's 20th century that the imitative Iotians had used as a blueprint for their society. Spock played the part of one of the bosses of the main syndicate, "The Federation," and helped Kirk unite the two warring bosses into a form of government. (TOS: "A Piece of the Action")

Spock, along with the Enterprise, encountered a space amoeba that destroyed entire star systems. The USS Intrepid, which was sent to investigate the phenomenon, was destroyed, and Spock felt the Vulcans on the ship dying. In order to gain information on the creature, Spock piloted a shuttle into the amoeba and found that it was about to reproduce by fission. He subsequently destroyed the creature with an antimatter bomb. (TOS: "The Immunity Syndrome")
Spock's body was later taken over by Henoch, one of three survivors of an ancient civilization that had destroyed itself. The three had become energy beings to survive and wished to build androids to house their minds. Henoch, the rival of fellow survivor Sargon, refused to relinquish Spock's body and attempted to kill Sargon. He himself was killed with the help of Spock's consciousness and Sargon's wife Thalassa. (TOS: "Return to Tomorrow")

Spock came in contact with various other worlds in the early part of 2268. He was captured by Ekosians who had based their society on that of Nazi Germany and tortured him for information about the Enterprise. John Gill, a Federation historian, had visited Ekos and attempted to use the efficiency of Nazi Germany to bring stability to the planet. Toward the end of the encounter, it was found out that Gill was drugged by his deputy Melakon. Through the use of the mind meld, Spock helped bring Gill to almost full wakefulness. (TOS: "Patterns of Force")
Spock battled Kelvans who tried to take over the Enterprise in order to return to their homeworld in the Andromeda Galaxy. He helped Kirk stop Ronald Tracey, a Federation captain interfering in Omega IV's societies by arming the Kohms against the Yangs. He battled the government of a planet where a Rome-like civilization had never fallen and gladiatorial games still took place in the planet's modern era. (TOS: "By Any Other Name", "The Omega Glory", "Bread and Circuses")

Later the same year, Spock's brain was stolen by the Eymorgs to help power the Great Teacher that controlled their society and provided for all their needs. McCoy was able to reconnect Spock's brain to his body with the same technology used to remove it. (TOS: "Spock's Brain")
Spock, along with Kirk, stole a cloaking device from the Romulans. As part of the plan to retrieve the device, he pretended to kill Kirk in self-defense and romanced the craft's commander in order to gain her trust. He initially intended only to carry out his mission but experienced actual feelings for the beautiful and brilliant commander. After Kirk returned to the Romulans' craft disguised as a Romulan and stole the device, Spock stalled the Romulans long enough for the device to be installed in the Enterprise. The ship escaped with the cloaking device and the Romulan commander on board, who made a pact with Spock to keep their mutual feelings for the other a secret. (TOS: "The Enterprise Incident")
Spock later saved Kirk and a tribe of transplanted Native Americans when he helped save their planet Amerind from an asteroid by activating a deflector beam. (TOS: "The Paradise Syndrome") He allowed Kollos to take over his body so that he could guide the Enterprise back into the galaxy after a mad Larry Marvick had driven it into an uncharted region. The Medeusans were a highly intelligent species but their bodies were grotesque in form – so much so that gazing upon a Medeusan would cause instant insanity in humanoids. However, it was said that telepathically viewing a Medeusan's mind, as Spock did, was quite a beautiful experience. (TOS: "Is There in Truth No Beauty?")
Spock helped save an landing party from the Melkotians who had, as punishment for trespassing, forced them to relive the infamous gunfight at the OK Corral in a recreation of Tombstone, Arizona. (TOS: "Spectre of the Gun") He also helped redirect Yonada from colliding with Daran V. (TOS: "For the World is Hollow and I Have Touched the Sky")
Spock took command of the Enterprise when a spatial interphase trapped Kirk between universes. Despite a Tholian attack from Commander Loskene, Spock and the Enterprise crew managed to retrieve Kirk and escaped from the Tholians' energy web. (TOS: "The Tholian Web")
A race of psychokinetics later captured Spock, Kirk, and McCoy. The aliens forced them to take part in dangerous games and unwanted love affairs. (TOS: "Plato's Stepchildren")
After hyper-accelerated aliens took over the Enterprise and hyper-accelerated Kirk to take as a hostage, Spock managed to receive a warning from Kirk and became hyper-accelerated himself but carried an antidote with him. He and Kirk stopped the aliens and retook the ship. (TOS: "Wink of an Eye")
Spock was part of a landing party that aliens were using to test the worthiness of an empathic race. A supernova was going to destroy their planetary system, and the aliens wanted to see if their race should be saved. After the aliens tortured Kirk, Spock, and McCoy, the empath Gem healed them. Impressed by this, the aliens saved her planet. (TOS: "The Empath")


===== Year Five =====

In early 2269, Spock and Kirk took a new medicine that could cure mental illness to a Federation mental facility. However, under the leadership of former Starfleet captain Garth of Izar, inmates had taken over the facility. Garth captured Spock and Kirk, putting their lives in danger. Spock escaped and found Kirk but Garth, who had developed shapeshifting powers, had assumed Kirk's identity. Spock determined the real Kirk from the impostor and subdued Garth, thus giving him medication that helped his mental illness. (TOS: "Whom Gods Destroy")
In the same year, Spock was part of a landing party that found a Human named Flint. He found masterpiece paintings and original classical music. Flint admitted that he had been Johannes Brahms and Leonardo da Vinci on Earth, and that he was an immortal being. (TOS: "Requiem for Methuselah")

Spock helped Kirk negotiate a peace treaty between two societies on Ardana. He also became attracted to Droxine, the daughter of Plasus, the ruler of Ardana; he referred to her as a work of art and even discussed pon farr with her. However, nothing ever came out of the relationship. (TOS: "The Cloud Minders")
The Excalbians forced Spock and Kirk into a battle between good and evil to study Human concepts. The aliens created images of people who possessed "good" qualities, such as Abraham Lincoln and Surak, against "bad" people such as Colonel Phillip Green and Kahless. (TOS: "The Savage Curtain")
Spock, Kirk, and McCoy entered a time portal, and were stuck in different past eras of Sarpeidon which was about to be destroyed by an exploding sun. Spock and McCoy traveled into the planet's ice age where they met Zarabeth, who had been sent there as punishment. Even though McCoy was dying from the cold, Spock wished to remain with the woman with whom he had fallen in love since, in this time period, he had emotions. Eventually, he discovered the portal door and saved McCoy. (TOS: "All Our Yesterdays")
After Janice Lester transferred her consciousness into Kirk's body and his consciousness into her body, she attempted to kill Kirk and assume his captaincy. However, Spock managed to expose her and helped to re-transfer Kirk's consciousness into his body. (TOS: "Turnabout Intruder")

Spock joined a landing party that beamed down to inspect the second planet of the Taurean system. There, he became affected by the glandular secretion of the female members of Theela's species who inhabited there, who were known for controlling the male mind. This drained Spock of his "life force," causing him to age at a rate of ten years per day. Spock escaped the females of the planet and contacted the Enterprise. An all-female security detachment led by Lieutenant Nyota Uhura eventually recovered him and the landing party. By using their molecular pattern stored in the transporter system, Spock and the others were returned to their previous ages. (TAS: "The Lorelei Signal")

On a mission to Phylos, Spock was captured by Stavos Keniclius who planned to clone him and make an army of Spock clones to enforce an era of peace throughout the galaxy. His first clone, Spock Two, possessed all of the original's memories, abilities, and sense of logic. However, the cloning process left the original Spock near death. Since Spock Two possessed his progenitor's sense of logic, he mind melded with him and restored his mind, most likely transferring his katra back into the original Spock. The original Spock proposed that Spock Two remain on Phylos to help Keniclius rebuild the Phylosian society. (TAS: "The Infinite Vulcan")


=== Purging emotions ===
After completing the Enterprise's five-year mission of exploration, Spock chose to return to his home planet. As a result of his occasional displays of emotion during his Enterprise missions, he decided to undergo the kolinahr ritual to purge himself of the last vestiges of emotion. (Star Trek: The Motion Picture)


=== V'ger crisis ===
Two and half years after leaving Starfleet, Spock felt the arrival of a vast consciousness. He aborted his kolinahr training and resumed his Starfleet career both for personal reasons and to help Rear Admiral Kirk during the V'ger incident. Spock's return to Starfleet amazed former colleagues and others but his reputation remained excellent, with Commander Will Decker stating that he was "well-aware of Mr. Spock's qualifications" when Spock offered to again serve as science officer. Within three hours, he helped Scott repair the Enterprise's malfunctioning warp drive. (Star Trek: The Motion Picture)

Spock's attitude towards his colleagues was far different from when he had served with them during the five-year mission. Wishing to rid himself of any personal attachments to Starfleet, he no longer considered any of the crew to be his friends and barely acknowledged them upon his return except where his duties demanded it. Feeling that the consciousness would answer for his quest, he broke into an airlock and stole a thruster suit. He exited the ship and proceeded to the next chamber of the mechanism, witnessing a planet populated by living machines. There, he attempted a mind meld and he realized V'ger's quest. Knocked unconscious by the enormous power of V'ger during the meld, Spock was recovered in open space by Kirk. Later, he was in sickbay being treated for neurological trauma. He informed Kirk that V'ger was a life-form of its own, seeking answers to its questions; specifically "Is this all that I am? Is there nothing more?" Grasping Kirk's hand while lying on a biobed, Spock told Kirk that the simple feeling of touching another was something beyond V'ger's comprehension.
Spock later accompanied Kirk, Decker, and McCoy to the heart of V'ger, guided by the Ilia probe. The group discovered V'ger was actually the 20th century NASA probe Voyager 6. Spock deduced that the old probe was found by the living machine inhabitants of a planet located on the other side of the galaxy and they built the mammoth vessel so it could fulfill Voyager's simple programming, "learn all that is learnable." Spock told Kirk that V'ger had to evolve, as its knowledge had reached the limits of the known universe.
Spock informed McCoy and the others that other dimensions and higher levels of being could not be proven logically and V'ger was therefore incapable of believing in them, needing the Human quality to leap beyond logic. Decker chose to merge with V'ger, and Kirk, McCoy, and Spock escaped shortly thereafter when it and Decker evolved into another dimension. Afterwards, Spock chose to remain on the Enterprise rather than return to his homeworld.
Spock's direct encounter with V'ger showed him that purging his emotions and operating on pure logic would not answer his questions but would simply create new ones. (Star Trek: The Motion Picture)


=== Death and resurrection ===
Sometime after the V'ger incident, Spock was promoted to captain and assigned to Starfleet Academy where he trained cadets on the Enterprise which had been retired from active service.

In early 2285, Spock, while on a training mission, ceded command of the Enterprise to Kirk during a mission that involved keeping the Genesis Device from Khan Noonien Singh. When Kirk and the Enterprise defeated Khan, he armed the device. Spock repaired the Enterprise's warp drive in a severely irradiated portion of engineering in order to save the crew. He saved the ship but sacrificed his own life in the process. Following his funeral service, Kirk gave Spock a "burial by sea" by firing Spock's body into space inside a torpedo casing. (Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan)

Spock's coffin landed on the surface of the Genesis Planet. The radiation emanating from the planet regenerated his cells. Spock was thus reborn as a child but quickly aged to adulthood. However, his mind was a complete blank. Kirk and the rest of the Enterprise's senior staff disobeyed Starfleet orders so that they could retrieve Spock's body. On Vulcan, Spock's living body, now at the age of his death, was reunited with his katra which Spock himself had placed in McCoy prior to his death via mind meld. (Star Trek III: The Search for Spock)
After his katra and body were re-integrated, Spock trained for three months with the help of his mother to bring his knowledge and intellect back to where it had been before he died. Answering many complicated questions at rapid fire during his memory test, he had difficulty answering the question "How do you feel?", something he felt was irrelevant, though his mother disagreed. Returning back to Earth aboard the HMS Bounty with his Enterprise crewmates to offer testimony in their defense to the Federation Council, Spock and the crew discovered that the planet was under siege by a mysterious alien probe which was causing critical damage to Earth's oceans and subsequently Earth's ecosystem. Analyzing the transmission the probe was producing, Spock concluded that the probe was transmitting the songs sung by whales, specifically humpback whales. Spock informed Kirk that the humpback whales had been extinct since the 21st century and suggested the crew travel back through time to acquire humpback whales. Spock's calculations from memory for the slingshot effect around Sol proved instrumental in the Bounty's successful journey back to the year 1986.

Upon the landing of the cloaked Bird-of-Prey in Golden Gate Park, Spock teamed up with Kirk and together they set off in search of humpback whales. The pair discovered George and Gracie at the Cetacean Institute in Sausalito. Spock jumped into the whales' tank and mind melded with Gracie, discovering she was pregnant. After traveling back to 2286 with the whales and cetacean biologist Gillian Taylor, Spock and the rest of the crew saved Earth once again by releasing George and Gracie into the San Francisco Bay from the sunken Bounty. The whales successfully communicated with the probe and it left Earth's solar system. After the dismissal of all charges to the crew of the Enterprise, save for Kirk, Spock spoke to his father and asked him to relay a message to his mother: That he felt fine. Spock went on to serve as a Starfleet officer for several more years aboard the new USS Enterprise-A. (Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home)


=== First officer of the USS Enterprise-A ===
Prior to the launch of the new Enterprise, Spock was recruited to test the new brig as he was the most "intelligent and resourceful person the designers could find." However, despite his ingenuity, he failed to escape. (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier)
Spock joined Kirk and McCoy for shore leave at Yosemite National Park and observed Kirk climbing El Capitan with his levitation boots. He saved Kirk's life when he slipped and fell off of the mountain, grabbing his ankle just seconds before he was killed by the impact. Later, Spock told Kirk and McCoy that before leaving the Enterprise-A, he had studied all the details involving "camping out" and roasted a marshmallow over a fire. Spock's shore leave was interrupted when Commander Uhura brought the shuttlecraft Galileo to the trio's campsite to bring them to the Enterprise as the transporters were malfunctioning.

Upon the Enterprise's mission to Nimbus III to resolve a hostage situation, Kirk retained Spock as his first officer. During the Enterprise strike team's rescue mission to Paradise City on Nimbus III, Spock discovered his long-lost half-brother Sybok had been the leader of the Galactic Army of Light, the group responsible for capturing the three diplomats. Sybok hijacked the Enterprise and ordered that it be brought through the Great Barrier. During the subsequent voyage in the shuttle Copernicus to the mythical Sha Ka Ree, Spock tried to console his brother when they could not initially find "God" on the surface.
Shortly thereafter, the landing party encountered the supernatural being when it presented itself to them. Learning of the malevolent nature of the being calling itself "God", Sybok sacrificed his life to save Spock and his friends. Spock and McCoy were beamed up to the Enterprise through the repaired transporter, leaving Kirk alone. The transporter was severely damaged when Klaa's Bird-of-Prey fired on the Enterprise. Spock saved Kirk's life from the entity by commandeering the Bird-of-Prey with the help of General Korrd and firing on it with the Klingon ship's weapons. Later, in the Enterprise-A's observation lounge, Spock reflected on the loss of his brother. Kirk told him that he had lost a brother once, but he was fortunate in that he got him back. Returning to Earth, Spock resumed his shore leave in Yosemite with Kirk and McCoy, this time playing "Row, Row, Row Your Boat" on his Vulcan lute. (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier)
In 2293, Spock was chosen to be the Federation's special envoy to the "Gorkon Initiative" as it was he who opened secret talks with Chancellor Gorkon following the Praxis disaster. Spock later committed Kirk to the negotiations with the Klingon Empire. During Kirk and McCoy's subsequent trial and imprisonment for the assassination of Gorkon, Spock took command of the Enterprise and the murder investigation. He led the rescue mission of Kirk and McCoy from Rura Penthe and helped stop an assassination attempt on the Federation President. Though this mission was successful, Spock blamed himself for endangering Kirk and the consequences that followed, a guilt that lasted seventy-five years. (Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country; TNG: "Unification II")


== Diplomatic career ==

In 2293, on the suggestion of his father, Spock opened a dialog with Gorkon in the hopes of initiating peace talks. He recommended an alliance between the Klingon Empire and the Federation at the Khitomer Conference, and Gorkon agreed to negotiate. His recommendation produced a major dispute because the Federation viewed Klingons as outlaws who built their empire through violence and brutality. Despite seemingly insurmountable odds, an alliance was nevertheless forged, bringing peace and stability to the Alpha Quadrant that had not existed for two hundred years. Tuvok, who initially opposed the alliance, later noted that "Spock's suggestion, so controversial at first, proved to be the cornerstone of peace." (Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country; VOY: "Alliances")
Also during the Khitomer Conference, Spock opened up negotiations with Ambassador Pardek of Romulus in an attempt to unify Vulcan and the Romulan Star Empire. (TNG: "Unification I", "Unification II")

Spock and Sarek publicly disagreed over issues involving the Cardassians, leading to a rift in their relationship. (TNG: "Unification I")
In his later years, Spock went into semi-retirement, choosing to act as a Federation ambassador, much as his father had done. (TNG: "Unification I")


==== Reunification attempts ====
In 2368, Spock undertook a secret personal mission to Romulus, unauthorized by the Federation Council or Starfleet. As he knew it would be risky, he preferred not to involve others and wrapped up his affairs. He acted to facilitate Romulan-Vulcan reunification, avoiding contact with the rest of the Federation as he was reluctant to risk anyone's life but his own on such a mission after the near-fatal consequences to Kirk and McCoy in their involvement in the Khitomer conference. Captain Jean-Luc Picard met Spock on Romulus and informed him of his father's death. Before Picard's departure, the two mind-melded, allowing Spock to realize the depth of his father's feelings for him. (TNG: "Unification I", "Unification II")
In 3189, a recording of Spock made on stardate 45825 while on Romulus was retrieved from the personal files of Admiral Picard and viewed by Michael Burnham and Cleveland Booker. (DIS: "Unification III")


==== "Cowboy diplomacy" ====
In 2369, Spock was involved in an incident of "cowboy diplomacy" in which Deanna Troi was temporarily kidnapped to help with the defection of three Romulans, including Vice-Proconsul M'ret, to the Federation. He also had a message sent back to the Federation indirectly through the defector DeSeve. (TNG: "Face Of The Enemy")


==== Rumors ====
When an unknown person was beamed on board the USS Enterprise-D in 2370, Ben told a few junior officers that he heard that this was Ambassador Spock. (TNG: "Lower Decks")

In 2380, Ensign Beckett Mariner asked Ensign Brad Boimler if he knew who Spock was, to which Boimler answered, "I think I know who Spock is." (LD: "Second Contact")


==== The Red Matter incident ====

In 2387, Romulus faced destruction when its sun threatened to go into a massive supernova. After a synth attack on Mars destroyed the Federation fleet being assembled to evacuate Romulus, Spock formed a plan which involved injecting red matter into the star, thus creating an artificial black hole which would consume the star instead. Piloting the Jellyfish, an advanced spacecraft equipped with red matter, Spock proceeded to the star to carry out his mission. Before he could, the star went supernova and destroyed Romulus. With other worlds threatened with destruction, Spock continued his mission and successfully created a black hole which consumed the supernova. Before he could escape, however, the Romulan mining vessel Narada, commanded by Nero, intercepted him. Nero blamed Spock for Romulus' destruction and was bent on revenge. The black hole eventually pulled in the Narada and the Jellyfish. (Star Trek, PIC: "Remembrance")


== Legacy ==
Though brought up to embrace a Vulcan way of life that he would eventually commit to as a young man, Spock's encounter with V'ger had a profound impact on his personal philosophy. From that point forward, Spock began to further embrace his Human half and more readily explore the influences and impacts of Human emotion, though he continued to temper his outward expressiveness. (Star Trek: The Motion Picture; Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home; Star Trek)
Spock's self-sacrifice to save the Enterprise from Khan formed the basis of Starfleet's The Needs of the Many holographic training drill, while the rescue of his resurrected self from the Genesis Planet was the basis for the Escape from Spacedock drill. Both simulations were in use by 2381. (LD: "I, Excretus")
Kirk's old bar on Starbase 25 still had Kirk and Spock's names scratched into the counter top as of 2381. (LD: "An Embarrassment Of Dooplers")
Despite his half-Human heritage, by the 24th century, Spock's name had become synonymous with Vulcans. (LD: "Veritas")

By 2381, Brad Boimler had a figurine of Spock in a late 2270s Starfleet uniform. (LD: "I Have No Bones Yet I Must Flee", "Something Borrowed, Something Green", "Of Gods and Angles")
Among Boimler's questions for his dream of Hikaru Sulu were what it was like working with Nyota Uhura and Spock. (LD: "Crisis Point 2: Paradoxus")
Spock was known as "Sprok" to Enderprizians, and was "well-known for his words so wise", including the phrase "most illogical." (PRO: "All the World's a Stage")
By 2399, Spock became known as "The Great Spock". (PIC: "The End is the Beginning")
His work towards reunification eventually led Romulans to settling on Vulcan and beginning to merge their society with the Vulcans, later renaming the planet to Ni'Var centuries after Spock's disappearance. However, they eventually left the Federation after the Burn. After reaching Federation Headquarters in 3189, a year after her arrival from 2257, Michael Burnham learned of her brother's achievements and viewed a recording of Spock talking to Jean-Luc Picard. Despite Ni'Var's separation from the Federation, Burnham's status as Spock's sister opened the chance for her to negotiate for the SB-19 data. (DIS: "Unification III") While onboard the ISS Enterprise, Burnham stared nostalgically at the science station and commented to Cleveland Booker that it had been her brother's station on the USS Enterprise. (DIS: "Mirrors")
Spock's legacy further extended into the alternate reality. It was he who located New Vulcan, a new homeworld for the Vulcans following the loss of their old one. (Star Trek) Following his death, alternate reality Spock originally planned to resign his Starfleet commission and continue the work the ambassador began on New Vulcan. However, after seeing a photograph of the prime reality Enterprise crew that was among old Spock's personal effects, alternate Spock changed his mind, having come to the conclusion that for now, his destiny lay with his crewmates. (Star Trek Beyond)
In 3195, he was listed with other luminaries of Starfleet Academy on a commemoration wall in the USS Athena. (SA: "Kids These Days" set decoration)


== Involvement in the alternate reality ==

Spock emerged from the black hole in the year 2258 of the alternate reality. Since Nero had emerged twenty-five years earlier, Spock was immediately intercepted by the Narada upon his arrival. Both Spock and the Jellyfish were captured by Nero who had been waiting for him. Spock's life was spared by Nero, although Nero marooned him on Delta Vega where he could witness the destruction of Vulcan from the planet's surface. After Nero used some of the red matter from the Jellyfish to create a black hole in Vulcan's planetary core, Spock watched helplessly from Delta Vega as his homeworld was destroyed.

Shortly thereafter, Spock rescued a Starfleet officer from a hengrauggi, only to discover that the young officer was James T. Kirk himself, that reality's Spock having marooned him on the planet for mutiny. The elder Spock was surprised that Kirk was not captain of the Enterprise. When Spock heard from Kirk that Captain Christopher Pike had been captured, Spock knew that Nero was responsible, describing the Romulan as "particularly troubled." Through a mind meld, Spock explained to Kirk his presence in this time period and the reasons behind Nero's actions.

He then walked with Kirk to the Starfleet Delta Vega outpost, where they met Montgomery Scott. Using Scott's equation for transwarp beaming (which Scott had not actually figured out yet), Spock was able to transport Kirk back to the Enterprise along with Scott. When asked why he would not come with them, Spock stated that his other self must not know of his existence, implying that it could cause some kind of temporal paradox. Knowing his younger self would never take the course of action that could stop Nero but that Kirk would, Spock instructed Kirk to use Regulation 619 to force his younger self to give up command to him by proving he was emotionally compromised. He informed Kirk he knew his younger counterpart was emotionally compromised due to the destruction of his homeworld. Kirk followed his advice and, by emotionally manipulating the alternate Spock, managed to take command of the Enterprise.

After the Enterprise defeated the Narada and Nero, the elder Spock returned to Earth. There, he met his less-than-surprised younger self (while Kirk had kept his word, his word was no match for even the intellect of the younger Spock, as he had figured out who Kirk's mysterious benefactor must be) and convinced him to remain in Starfleet. He also explained the reason he had not returned to the Enterprise with Kirk to explain things was that he had not wished to deprive Kirk and Spock of the chance of working together and developing the friendship they were destined to have. He then revealed he would handle establishing a Vulcan colony on a suitable planet, while instructing his younger self to stay in Starfleet before wishing him good luck and walking away.

Afterwards, Spock witnessed the official promotion of Kirk to captain of the USS Enterprise, repeating what he knew the crew would say before launch, apparently reminiscing on his own experiences as a member of the crew of the Enterprise. He left with an intention to establish a Vulcan colony. His attempts to convince his younger self succeeded and the younger of the two Spocks returned to the Enterprise to act as Kirk's first officer. (Star Trek)

A year later, Spock was living on New Vulcan, having made a solemn vow not to further interfere with history by keeping information about his experiences confidential. However, when the younger Spock contacted him for information regarding Khan Noonien Singh, the old Spock felt obligated to break his vow. He responded that Khan was the most dangerous adversary the Enterprise had faced, and that it had required a great sacrifice to stop him.
Ironically, the younger Kirk later made the same sacrifice Spock himself had made when facing Khan in the prime reality to save the crew of the Enterprise, though he was revived. (Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan; Star Trek Into Darkness)


==== Final death ====

Spock passed away of natural causes on New Vulcan on January 2, 2263.

After his death, a small cache of personal items Spock had managed to retrieve from the Jellyfish was turned over to the younger Spock, including a photograph of the prime reality's bridge crew of the Enterprise-A from around 2287, illustrating to the younger Spock that his destiny was to serve alongside Kirk, McCoy, and the others for decades to come. After struggling at first with whether or not to leave Starfleet in light of the elder Spock's death, this inheritance caused the younger Spock to change his mind and remain with his friends instead. (Star Trek Beyond)


== Alternate timelines and realities ==


=== Alternate Neutral Zone incursion ===
In an alternate timeline where Captain Christopher Pike avoided his crippling fate, Spock was his first officer on the USS Enterprise in 2266 during the Neutral Zone Incursion. Having been brought from 2259 by his future self to see the consequences of his actions, Pike enlisted Spock's help to make sense of his presence in the future and what he was meant to do there. During the following confrontation with the Romulans, Spock worked on repairing the weapons systems on the Enterprise and was severely injured, leaving him in a state similar to the Pike of the correct timeline. Spock's prognosis was grim and even if he survived, he was unlikely to ever be the same again. As a result, Spock could not take part in causing reunification between the Vulcans and Romulans and Pike came to believe that he had exchanged his own fate for Spock's. (SNW: "A Quality of Mercy")
After showing his 2259 self the future, the Christopher Pike of the alternate timeline revealed that he had learned from the Boreth monks that in every timeline where Pike changed his own fate, Spock died as a result. Because of this, in all of those futures, Spock couldn't go on to do the great things that he was meant to do which would change the fate of the galaxy. (SNW: "A Quality of Mercy")


=== Alternate 2259 ===

In an alternate timeline where Vulcan was at war with the Romulan Star Empire, where by 2259, Spock held the rank of captain and commanded the Sh'Rel.
During an engagement with the Romulans, the Sh'Rel was damaged and he requested United Earth Fleet Captain James T. Kirk of the UEF Enterprise for assistance. Kirk however refused as United Earth had their own problems with the Romulans and could not afford to fight a war on two fronts. (SNW: "Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow")


== Anything but canon scenarios ==


== Physiology ==
Although half Human, Spock's physiology retained most of its Vulcan characteristics such as the green blood, the placement of his liver, (TOS: "The Apple", "A Private Little War") his strength, (TOS: "The Naked Time", "This Side of Paradise", "Operation -- Annihilate!") telepathic abilities, (TOS: "Dagger of the Mind", "A Taste of Armageddon", "By Any Other Name") and his greater lifespan (TOS: "The Deadly Years"; TAS: "The Lorelei Signal"; TNG: "Unification II"; Star Trek) when compared to the average Human. However, it should also be noted that the life he lived was still about forty years shorter than the average Vulcan, who generally lived to be around two hundred years old. His father Sarek, for example, was 203 at his death. (Star Trek Beyond; ENT: "Broken Bow"; TNG: "Sarek"; TNG: "Unification II")
His Human characteristics were obvious when Sarek was in need of a blood transfusion and concern over donating his hybridized blood would be a danger to Sarek's full Vulcan physiology. (TOS: "Journey to Babel") The other instance where his Human side was evident happened during the final stages of his kolinahr ritual acceptance. While on Vulcan performing the ritual, the V'ger probe approached proximity and its own emotional instability affected Spock's Human emotional side which he worked so hard to repress. (Star Trek: The Motion Picture) Spock's Human side was also present when spores affected him on Omicron Ceti III. (TOS: "This Side of Paradise")
Like most Vulcans, he experienced pon farr neurochemical imbalance at least every seven years until the symptoms were remedied through ritual mating or kal-if-fee (dueling). If not dealt with, a Vulcan could die within eight days of the first symptoms. Spock experienced pon farr at least twice, once performing the kal-if-fee with Kirk's assistance, once mating with Saavik while physiologically a youth as a result of his regeneration by the Genesis Device. Both successfully relieved his symptoms of pon farr's neurochemical issues. (TOS: "Amok Time"; Star Trek III: The Search for Spock)
As of Vulcan rituals concerning death, Spock was able to transfer his katra into someone that was close to him – such as a family member – who could then transfer the katra into a large repository on Vulcan. In his case, he picked Dr. McCoy as a host for his katra when he decided to expose himself to fatal warp core radiation in order to restore warp power to the Enterprise. His corpse regenerated when his torpedo casing casket was shot towards the Genesis planet and was subjected to the Genesis cycles that rapidly evolved all life on the planet. (Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan; Star Trek III: The Search for Spock)

After Spock received a mind meld from Captain Picard, he seemed to have accepted his Human side. He admitted to being emotionally compromised and showed some emotions when he dealt with Nero destroying Vulcan in the alternate timeline and dealing with his younger self. (TNG: "Unification II"; Star Trek)

On his Human side, Spock once implied he had an ancestral relationship to British author Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. (Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country)


== Personal interests ==
Spock carried a lifelong interest in art, literature, poetry, music (especially the Vulcan lute and the piano), and three-dimensional chess. (TOS: "Requiem for Methuselah", "Where No Man Has Gone Before", "Charlie X", "The Cloud Minders", "Court Martial"; TAS: "The Jihad", "The Magicks of Megas-Tu") His favorite foods were jumbo Vulcan mollusks, pok tar, and lutrog. (SNW: "Wedding Bell Blues") He disliked Italian food, possibly because like most Vulcans, he was a vegetarian. (TOS: "All Our Yesterdays"; TAS: "The Slaver Weapon"; Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home)


== Relationships ==


=== Friendships ===


==== James T. Kirk ====

Spock first met Kirk aboard the Enterprise in 2259, when it was under command of Fleet Captain Christopher Pike. (SNW: "Lost in Translation")
In 2265, after the death of Gary Mitchell, Spock's detached and logical analysis was relied on by Kirk as a supplement to his own intuitive and impulsive nature. Their official relationship deepened into a friendship of mutual respect and love that was, without a doubt, the most important relationship of both men's lives. As Edith Keeler observed of Spock's place in the world, "You? At his side. As if you've always been there and always will". (TOS: "The City on the Edge of Forever")

Kirk once described his Vulcan friend as "the noblest half of myself" and declared that Spock's immortal soul "is my responsibility, as surely as if it were my very own". Kirk even told Spock's father that he would never realize how important Spock was to him, and declared that, despite losing the Enterprise and his son, had he not tried to rescue his friend, "the cost would have been my soul". (Star Trek III: The Search for Spock)

The polywater intoxication that affected the Enterprise crew in 2266 led to a difficult encounter between Spock and Kirk. When Spock was urgently required by his commanding officer, an anguished and reflective Spock was found by Kirk regretting his inability to express love even for his mother. Trying to bring Spock around to the moment, Kirk slapped him. Spock's reaction was flat and revelatory: "Jim, when I feel friendship for you, I'm ashamed". Struck again, Spock responded in kind, sending Kirk backwards over a table. (TOS: "The Naked Time")
Spock was sympathetic to Kirk's plight after the transporter divided the captain's personality into opposite aspects. He referred to his own halves: "submerged... constantly at war with each other". Spock believed Kirk could survive such a contest intact and urged him to embrace the part of himself that, seemingly ugly, was crucial to his personality and captaincy. (TOS: "The Enemy Within")

After Kirk discovered emotional rage was the key to nullifying the effect of the pod plants' spores, his first step in retrieving his crew was to taunt Spock into anger. Anticipating the result of a Vulcan's strength pitted against him, Kirk wielded a pipe for protection. After calling him an "elf with a hyperactive thyroid" and saying he belonged "in the circus, right next to the dog-faced boy", Spock indeed lost control, nearly killing Kirk before regaining control of himself. (TOS: "This Side of Paradise")

In 2267, Spock began his pon farr mating cycle and behaved bizarrely aboard the Enterprise. Kirk called Spock "the best first officer in the Fleet" and "an enormous asset to me" as he pled with Spock to explain his actions. When told that taking Spock to Vulcan was against Starfleet orders, Kirk fired back "I owe him my life a dozen times over! Isn't that worth a career?". Joining him on Vulcan for his marriage ceremony, Kirk was drawn into T'Pring's scheme to marry another and forced to fight Spock to the death. McCoy, knowing Kirk was endangered, faked the captain's death, and the marriage was not consummated. Spock, despondent he had murdered his captain, was thrilled at the sight of Kirk alive, exclaiming "JIM!", which McCoy delighted in needling Spock about, once he gained his composure. (TOS: "Amok Time")
Kirk's understanding of Spock had an enormous impact on the mirror universe visited after a transporter accident in 2267. As Kirk's party prepared to return to their proper universe, Kirk implored the mirror Spock to re-examine his role in the fascistic Terran Empire, insisting "One man can make a difference". Mirror Spock's consideration of those words led to his rise to dominance and reform of the Empire, with drastic consequences. (TOS: "Mirror, Mirror"; DS9: "Crossover")
When Kirk was trapped in spatial interphase during a rescue operation in Tholian space, Spock ordered the Enterprise to maintain its position in an effort to retrieve him, in spite of the danger the Tholians presented and the disruptive nature of the local space. After Kirk's assumed death, Spock and McCoy viewed the "last orders" Kirk had prepared. Kirk urged Spock to use all the Vulcan disciplines at his disposal, tempered with intuitive insight. Kirk believed Spock had the latter qualities, but should they elude him, he was urged to seek out McCoy. (TOS: "The Tholian Web")

Kirk once commented to Garth that he and Spock were "brothers". Spock merely responded, "Captain Kirk speaks somewhat figuratively, and with undue emotion, but what he says is logical and I do, in fact, agree with it". (TOS: "Whom Gods Destroy")
When Dr. Janice Lester took over Kirk's body, Spock performed a mind meld on Kirk while he was trapped in Lester's body. Spock believed Kirk was Lester before anyone else, and when Lester-as-Kirk ordered his execution, he continued to stand by his friend. (TOS: "Turnabout Intruder")

At the end of the Enterprise's five-year mission, a period marked by his frequent loss of emotional control, Spock chose to leave Starfleet and his friends to pursue the kolinahr discipline of logic on Vulcan. His return to the Enterprise during the V'ger threat was a cold event, without acknowledgment of his past friendships. In V'ger's aftermath, Spock finally achieved equilibrium, able to express his friendship for Kirk without the influence of aliens or illness, and notably lacking any threat of physical violence. In 2285, Spock was calmly able to tell Kirk "You're my superior officer. You are also my friend. I have been and always shall be yours". (Star Trek: The Motion Picture; Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan)

Spock's sacrifice of his own life to save the Enterprise from Khan's detonation of the Genesis Device deeply affected Kirk. At his funeral, Kirk could only bring himself to say of Spock: "Of all the souls I have encountered in my travels, his was the most... Human". (Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan)
The revelation that Spock's katra, his living spirit, survived in McCoy's tormented mind led Kirk to risk his career, and in turn, his crew's. He first asked Fleet Admiral Morrow for permission to retrieve Spock's body from the Genesis Planet to bring it, and McCoy, to Vulcan. Kirk insisted that any chance to save Spock's soul was his responsibility, "as surely as if it were my very own". His request declined, he told his crew "the word is No. I am therefore going anyway".
With the help of Uhura, Scott, Sulu, and Chekov, Kirk rescued McCoy from confinement and commandeered the Enterprise from Spacedock One. The renegade mission saw the death of Kirk's ship as well as his son. Finding Spock's body re-animated by Genesis, Kirk brought him and McCoy to Vulcan for the fal-tor-pan (re-fusion) ritual. The first person Spock recognized was Kirk: "Jim. Your name, is Jim". (Star Trek III: The Search for Spock)
During their homecoming from Vulcan and eventually their trip to 1986, Kirk tried to remind the resurrected Spock, suffering from memory loss, of their friendship and past adventures together. After Kirk and the crew's trial, Spock told his father his "associates" were his friends. (Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home)

In 2287, Spock accompanied Kirk and McCoy on a camping trip at Yosemite National Park, which abruptly ended when Spock's half-brother Sybok diverted the Enterprise to Nimbus III. After their adventure on Sha Ka Ree and Sybok's death, Kirk referred to Spock once again as his "brother" and told him and McCoy that they were his real family. (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier)
When Spock later entered the alternate reality, he told the James T. Kirk of that reality of their deep friendship, despite the fact that the alternate Spock had marooned Kirk on Delta Vega. Before returning Kirk, along with Scott's counterpart, to the USS Enterprise (revealing to this Scott an advancement in transporter technology over a century before his prime counterpart perfected it), Spock – who in this reality had designed the Kobayashi Maru simulation and openly begrudged Kirk outsmarting it – was reminded that this could be viewed as "cheating", to which he replied that an "old friend" – namely, Kirk – had taught him how to cheat.
Later, when Spock Prime spoke to his own alternate-reality counterpart about that universe's Kirk, he explained that he had resorted to a level of subterfuge in order to inform both men of the necessity of their friendship, both to themselves and to others. Spock Prime explained: "I could not deprive you of the revelation of all that you could accomplish together, of a friendship that will define you both in ways you cannot yet realize". (Star Trek)


==== Leonard McCoy ====
The relationship between Spock and Dr. Leonard McCoy seemed a little strained at times on McCoy's part because of his taunts about Spock's green blood and lack of emotion. However, there was an obvious respect and friendship among James T. Kirk, Spock, and McCoy. McCoy, in fact, was one of the two friends Spock requested to join him in his marriage ceremony. (TOS: "Amok Time")
While he would rarely do so without provocation, Spock was also quite capable of turning the tables on the doctor. During Kirk's court-martial, after an astonished McCoy discovered him in the briefing room playing chess against the ship's computer, Spock casually allowed him to assume the worst (to the point of thanking him after the furious doctor had said he was "The most cold-blooded man I've ever known"), waiting until he reached the door to reveal that he had been victorious in four consecutive games – since the computer, whose account of the incident was the main evidence against Kirk, was programmed to be unbeatable, this proved that it had been tampered with (something only Kirk, Spock, and the "dead" Commander Finney were authorized to do), and cast doubt on the credibility of its account, keeping the trial going long enough to discover that Finney was, in fact, alive.
Later that year, after the Enterprise crew had defeated the androids on planet Mudd (beings almost Vulcan-like in their lack of emotion and their "logical, pragmatic" thinking), McCoy told Spock that he must be quite unhappy to see that "poor, illogical" Humans were able to fairly defeat them, Spock responded that this was quite satisfactory, as nobody needed him and his logical ways as much as a ship full of Humans. (TOS: "Court Martial", "I, Mudd")


==== Christopher Pike ====
Spock and Pike developed a mutual respect and fondness for one another during their service aboard the Enterprise; Pike at one point expressed how important Spock was to him, a feeling Spock reciprocated. (SNW: "A Quality of Mercy") Spock's loyalty to Pike went even so far as to risk court martial in 2267 to kidnap his disabled former captain and bring him to Talos IV to live a life of illusion and happiness. (TOS: "The Menagerie, Part I", "The Menagerie, Part II")


==== Nyota Uhura ====
Spock first met Uhura aboard the Enterprise in 2259, when it was under command of Captain Christopher Pike. (SNW: "Strange New Worlds")


=== Family ===
Spock quoted the British 18th century author Sir Arthur Conan Doyle on separate occasions also stating that the author was an ancestor of his. (SNW:"A Space Adventure Hour")


==== Sarek ====
Spock had a rather strained relationship with his Vulcan father Sarek. For his part, Sarek expressed ambivalence about his son's half-Human heritage from the moment of his birth. (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier) He gave Spock his first lessons in computers. The two fell out over Spock's decision to enlist in Starfleet instead of the Vulcan Science Academy. (TOS: "Journey to Babel")
While afflicted with polywater intoxication, Spock expressed he respected Sarek. (TOS: "The Naked Time") During the USS Enterprise's encounter with the Fesarius and its commander Balok, Spock commented that Balok reminded him of his father. (TOS: "The Corbomite Maneuver")
Spock and Sarek remained estranged until 2267. Father and son reunited when the Enterprise was assigned to escort Federation dignitaries, among them Sarek, to Babel. Spock and Sarek regarded each other coolly, though Sarek requested a different guide after Kirk offered for Spock to show the ambassador around the Enterprise. When Sarek suffered a serious heart attack and required a blood transfusion, Spock agreed to donate his blood to help his father. Afterwards, Spock and Sarek reconciled, and even teased Amanda together. (TOS: "Journey to Babel")
In 2286, Spock and Sarek reached a new level of reconciliation following the Whale Probe crisis. Sarek observed that Spock's Human friends were people of good character and apologized for opposing his son's decision to join Starfleet. When Spock asked Sarek to tell Amanda "I feel fine", Sarek looked upon his son with affectionate admiration. (Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home)
Unfortunately, Spock and Sarek fell out again many years later. According to Sarek's new wife Perrin, Spock attacked Sarek's position regarding the Cardassians. This disagreement opened a new rift between the two men that persisted until Sarek's passing in 2368. (TNG: "Unification I") After receiving news of his father's death, Spock reflected that he and Sarek never mind-melded. Jean-Luc Picard offered Spock the chance to meld with him so he could learn of Sarek's true feelings for him, which Spock accepted. (TNG: "Unification II")


==== Amanda Grayson ====
Spock had a close relationship with his Human mother Amanda Grayson. In 2259, Amanda aided Spock after he had been turned completely Human. The experience helped Spock gain a new appreciation for his mother and the trials she endured as a Human woman living among Vulcans. (SNW: "Charades")
While infected with polywater intoxication in 2266, Spock lamented never telling Amanda that he loved her. (TOS: "The Naked Time")
Mother and son were reunited aboard the Enterprise in 2267 en route to the Babel Conference. Amanda observed Spock had never learned to smile after all these years. When Sarek required emergency surgery, Amanda begged her son to donate his blood to help his father. Spock, however, believed it was his duty to command the Enterprise after Kirk had been gravely injured. A distraught Amanda declared to Spock that she'd hate him for the rest of her life if he didn't help Sarek. When Spock refused, Amanda slapped him across the face and stormed out of his quarters. Fortunately, the rift between mother and son was reconciled after Spock, thanks to some persuasion and trickery from a not-quite-recovered Kirk, helped to save Sarek. (TOS: "Journey to Babel")
In 2286, Amanda assisted Spock in his recovery following his fal-tor-pan. Her words of guidance led Spock to aid his crewmates. Spock later asked Sarek to tell his mother "I feel fine". (Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home)


==== Sybok ====
Sybok, Spock's elder half-brother, encountered Spock on Nimbus III in 2287, shortly before Sybok hijacked the Enterprise-A for his quest to find Sha Ka Ree in the Great Barrier. Spock had remained silent on the subject of his brother for decades, not even telling Kirk until Sybok had already taken control of the Enterprise. At first, Spock was extremely distant from him, but following Sybok's death, he realized what he had lost. (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier)


==== Michael Burnham ====
Michael was Spock's adoptive sister after her parents' presumed deaths. When she first met him, a very young Spock shut his bedroom door on her after greeting her with a holographic drawing of a dragon screaming. Over time, Spock and Michael grew closer, and Spock grew to idolize Michael. However, feeling she placed her adoptive family in danger from logic extremists who targeted her due to being Human, Michael decided to run away. Spock tried to persuade her otherwise, telling her he loved her and would run away with her. To push Spock away, Michael insulted him by calling him a "half-breed" who was "incapable of love". Her well-meaning insults deeply hurt Spock, who shunned his Human half in response and grew to no longer trust people. Over the years, Michael tried to make amends, but Spock showed no interest in reconnecting.
After they both grew up and entered Starfleet, Spock and Michael rarely talked to each other. Eventually, Spock and Michael were forced to come to terms with each other after the Federation-Klingon War. Michael searched for a missing Spock after meeting his commanding officer, Captain Christopher Pike of the USS Enterprise. Eventually finding her brother, she was dismayed to find Spock suffering from a mental breakdown due to an encounter with a time traveler. She was able to help restore Spock's mind with the help of the Talosians. However, this did not resolve the animosity between the siblings. They clashed several times, with Spock blaming Michael for causing the Federation-Klingon war and calling her out on her habit of assuming responsibility for all the wrongs in the universe. Eventually, the two came to terms with their respective shortcomings and eventually grow closer again as they worked together to solve the mystery of the Red Angel.
When Burnham needed take Discovery to the future in order to avoid Control having access to the Sphere information stored in the ship's memory, Spock volunteered to help her. Unfortunately, while helping Burnham prepare, Spock's shuttle was badly damaged. Both distraught that they could not be together in the future, they shared a bittersweet farewell, and Spock was transported away after one last "live long and prosper". (DIS: "Such Sweet Sorrow, Part 2")
In the months following Discovery's disappearance, Spock was unnerved that they had not received a signal to indicate that Discovery had arrived safely in the future. When the signal arrived, Spock found peace. (DIS: "Such Sweet Sorrow, Part 2")

In 3189, Michael Burnham watched a recording of Spock. She told her boyfriend Cleveland Booker that since she had arrived in the 32nd century, she hadn't bothered researching history to find out the type of man that Spock eventually became. She was proud of who he had become as well as happy he had found a way to reunify the Vulcans and Romulans. (DIS: "Unification III")


=== Romances ===


==== T'Pring ====

At age seven, Spock was bonded to T'Pring in a family-arranged Vulcan ceremony described in Human terms as "less than a marriage, but more than a betrothal." (TOS: "Amok Time")
T'Pring formally proposed marriage to Spock in 2259, but the two had not been married by 2267. (SNW: "Strange New Worlds")
When Spock experienced his pon farr of 2267, he succumbed to the madness of the plak tow mating instinct. The Enterprise diverted to Vulcan in time to consummate the marriage. Accompanied by Kirk and McCoy, Spock arrived at his family's ancient koon-ut-kal-if-fee site for the wedding ceremony officiated by the matriarch T'Pau. Unexpectedly – but within the bounds of Vulcan tradition – T'Pring demanded the challenge of kal-if-fee, forcing Spock to earn the right to marry his bride through victory in personal combat. Rather than her prospective consort Stonn, T'Pring chose Kirk as her champion.
Unwilling to appear weak or disrespectful in front of the legendary T'Pau, Kirk agreed to fight his first officer. Between rounds using the lirpa and ahn-woon weapons, T'Pau belatedly revealed the combat was "to the death," and it became clear that Kirk had little chance against Spock in the throes of his blood fever. McCoy intervened, deceptively dosing Kirk with a drug that simulated his death.
Spock's plak tow subsided after his apparent victory. Appalled at the turn of events, Spock calmly questioned T'Pring's decisions. T'Pring admitted her distaste for Spock's growing fame among Vulcans, and her mutual attraction to Stonn. By her logic, choosing Kirk meant neither victor would claim her in the end, and she would have her life with Stonn. Spock acknowledged her way of thinking, referring to it as "flawless". T'Pring, for her part, was honored, but Spock advised Stonn that he would find that "having... is not so pleasing a thing after all... as wanting."
After returning to the Enterprise, McCoy revealed Kirk's clandestine survival. A rare show of extreme emotion came from Spock when he exclaimed "JIM!" with a beaming smile. (TOS: "Amok Time")


==== Christine Chapel ====
Spock and Christine Chapel met when she was assigned to the Enterprise in 2259 along with Doctor Joseph M'Benga. (SNW: "Strange New Worlds")

When the pirate Angel took over the Enterprise, Angel took Spock and Christine Chapel hostage in an effort to get T'Pring to hand over a prisoner that was Angel's lover. To prevent the prisoner transfer, Spock and Christine Chapel engineered a ruse where Spock and Christine had developed romantic feelings for one another and kissed in front of Angel and T'Pring. (SNW: "The Serene Squall")
During Chief Engineer Hemmer's funeral, Chapel consoled Spock as he was feeling emotions such as rage and pain. Spock didn't want her to follow him but did so anyway and Chapel ended up hugging him. (SNW: "All Those Who Wander")
Spock and Chapel entered into a relationship for some time after his engagement with T'Pring ended due to him not confiding in her that he was transformed into a full Human and stripped of his Vulcan genes. The relationship reached its conclusion when Chapel was accepted into Roger Korby's fellowship. (SNW: "Charades", "Subspace Rhapsody")
The two were reunited after the USS Cayuga was destroyed by the Gorn and worked together to treat Marie Batel. Chapel admitted that their relationship had become too complicated for her and that time apart would be better for them as people, making it clear to Spock that anything romantic between them was over. (SNW: "Hegemony", "Hegemony, Part II")
Spock still held out hope that they could resume their relationship once Chapel returned from her fellowship and even took dance lessons from La'An Noonien-Singh. However, by the time that she returned, Chapel had already entered into a relationship with Roger Korby. Although jealous and upset, Spock recognized that he was not meant to be with Chapel and resisted Trelane's attempts to force them to marry, even working with Korby to stop Trelane. (SNW: "Wedding Bell Blues")

When the Psi 2000 intoxication infected the crew of the Enterprise in 2266, Chapel admitted her love for Spock, who was thereupon emotionally shocked. Her love for him was an ongoing issue, but never interfered with her professional duties. (TOS: "The Naked Time")
Chapel once housed Spock's consciousness to keep him from being destroyed by Henoch. They were later forced by powerful telepaths to kiss each other, but neither enjoyed the forced situation. (TOS: "Return to Tomorrow", "Plato's Stepchildren")
While under the spell of Harry Mudd's love potion, Spock became infatuated with Chapel, and was willing to fight for her love. However, the potion eventually wore off and then Chapel, as a side effect of the drug, seemed to hate Spock for a brief time. Spock commented to Mudd that a few brief moments of love being paid for with several hours of hatred is scarcely a bargain. (TAS: "Mudd's Passion")


==== La'an Noonien-Singh ====
Spock took dance lessons from fellow crew member La'an Noonien-Singh as he prepared for Nurse Chapel's return, not knowing that she had already started a relationship with her fellowship mentor Roger Korby. (SNW: "Wedding Bell Blues")
(SNW: "A Space Adventure Hour")


==== Leila Kalomi ====
On stardate 3417, Spock was infected by Omicron spores while on Omicron Ceti III by Leila Kalomi, who was serving as the Omicron colony's botanist. The spores broke down Spock's emotional control, and he confessed his love for Kalomi. Their time together was short-lived, however, as Kirk deduced a method of destroying the spores with intense emotion and induced anger in Spock.
Once free from the spores, Spock freed Kalomi and the rest of the planet from their influence. He later reflected that his time with Kalomi was the first time in his life at which he had felt happy. (TOS: "This Side of Paradise")


==== Zarabeth ====
When visiting the planet Sarpeidon Spock got trapped in in the planet's ice age in the past with Dr. McCoy. When there Spock began to act like the Vulcans of that time period and started to act emotional. There he fell madly in love with her. Eventually McCoy realized what was happening and they were eventually able to escape back to their time period without Zarabeth. (TOS: "All Our Yesterdays")


== Holograms ==
In 2261, a hologram of Spock was generated by the Enterprise computer as a part of La'An Noonien-Singh's test of the prototype holodeck. The hologram was so realistic that La'An didn't realize that it wasn't the actual Spock for most of the simulation. After La'An realized that Spock was the killer in her murder mystery, chosen because she would never suspect him, she was able to end the simulation. (SNW: "A Space Adventure Hour")

A hologram of Spock was created by the Romulans in 2368 for Sela to use to give a false address to the Federation. It was known by the title "Spock One". (TNG: "Unification II")
During Dal's setup of the Kobayashi Maru scenario aboard the USS Protostar in 2383, he requested that the computer select the best officers on his behalf, which included a holographic version of Spock, from the TOS era, as a member of his command crew. (PRO: "Kobayashi")


== Key dates ==
2230: Born in ShiKahr on Vulcan
2247–2250: Cadet at Starfleet Academy
Between 2250 and 2253: Assigned to the USS Kongo
2253: Assigned to the USS Enterprise under Captain Christopher Pike
2257:
Takes a leave of absence from Starfleet following the Federation-Klingon War
Assists the USS Discovery in solving the mystery of the Red Angel
2258: Returns to service aboard the Enterprise.
2259: Becomes engaged to T'Pring
2265–2270: Serves as First officer and science officer aboard the Enterprise under Captain James T. Kirk.
2268: Is offered an assignment with Medusan Ambassador Kollos.
2270: Resigns from Starfleet and returns to Vulcan to undergo the Kolinahr ritual
2270s: Returns to Starfleet to help with the V'ger crisis
Between the 2270s and 2285: Appointed captain of the USS Enterprise
2285:
Dies on the USS Enterprise
Transfers his Katra to Leonard McCoy
2286:
Is resurrected on the Genesis planet
Transfers to the USS Enterprise-A
2287–2293: First officer/science officer of the USS Enterprise-A
Between 2293 and 2368:
Resigns from starfleet
Becomes a Federation ambassador
Begins attempts to reunify the Romulan and Vulcan people
2387: Attempts to stop a star from destroying Romulus and ends up pulled into a black hole and transferred to an alternate reality.
2258 (alternate reality): leads the surviving members of the Vulcan people to start a new colony on New Vulcan
2263 (alternate reality): Dies on New Vulcan. The age must be around 161 if the time travel in 2387 through the black hole was in very short time and it led him to the same month in 2258.


== Memorable quotes ==
"Is there a valuable question in your arsenal?"
"Yes. Do you actually think the beard is working?"

- Spock and Burnham (DIS: "If Memory Serves")

"History will not provide an answer to your query, doctor. Instead you should be asking me, 'How is it I can remember tomorrow?'"

- Spock, to the psychiatrist (DIS: "If Memory Serves")

"This will go easier if you answer me. Or it could go harder."
"I beg to differ. Say goodbye, Spock."
(Spock raises his hand in the Vulcan salute)
"Goodbye, Spock."

- Leland, Burnham, and Spock (DIS: "If Memory Serves")

"Greetings, captain."
"Spock. Are you all right?"
"Much better for seeing you in person, sir. Even if we are riding into danger."
(Spock smiles)
"Is that a smile I see on your face?"
"I believe it is. Yes."
"Well, Welcome to Discovery."

- Spock and Christopher Pike's reunion on Discovery (DIS: "If Memory Serves")

"I don't suppose the Red Angel offered you any advice on how to handle a situation like this."
"No. But my limited experience as a fugitive suggests only one course of action."
"And what is that?"
"We run."

- Christopher Pike and Spock, on Discovery becoming "the most wanted ship in the galaxy" (DIS: "If Memory Serves")

"I happen to have a Human thing called an adrenaline gland."
"That does sound most inconvenient, however. Have you considered having it removed?"
"Very funny."
"Try to cross brains with Spock, he'll cut you to pieces every time."

- Bailey, Spock, and Sulu (TOS: "The Corbomite Maneuver")

"I am endeavoring, ma'am, to construct a mnemonic circuit using stone knives and bearskins."

- Spock, to Edith Keeler, regarding his frustrations with early twentieth century technology (TOS: "The City on the Edge of Forever")

"I have never understood the female capacity to avoid a direct answer to any question." (TOS: "This Side of Paradise")

"A curious creature. Its trilling seems to have a tranquilizing effect on the Human nervous system. Fortunately, of course, I am... immune... to... its... effect..."

- Spock, while petting a tribble (TOS: "The Trouble with Tribbles")

(To Alice 27) "I love you." 
(To Alice 210) "However, I hate you."
"But I am identical in every way with Alice 27!"
"Exactly. That is exactly why I hate you; because you are identical."
[The androids violently malfunction.]
"Fascinating."

- Spock and Alice 210 (TOS: "I, Mudd")

"Logic is a little, tweeting bird, chirping in a meadow. Logic is a wreath of pretty flowers that smell bad." (TOS: "I, Mudd")

"Nowhere am I so desperately needed as among a shipload of illogical Humans." (TOS: "I, Mudd")

"On my planet, 'to rest' is to rest, to cease using energy. To me, it is quite illogical to run up and down on green grass, using energy instead of saving it." (TOS: "Shore Leave")

"Enterprise to signaler on planet's surface. Identify self." (Reads answer) "'Hip, hip, hurrah...' and I believe it's pronounced 'Tally ho'." (TOS: "The Squire of Gothos")

"'Fascinating' is a word I use for the unexpected. In this case, I should think 'interesting' would suffice."

- Spock, regarding the puckish alien Trelane (TOS: "The Squire of Gothos")

"I have been, and always shall be, your friend."

- Spock, stated to Kirk at least three times – as his dying words, his first fully conscious words (recalling the previous conversation) after rebirth, and, in the alternate reality, after recognizing the young Human he just saved from a hengrauggi as that universe's James T. Kirk (Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan; Star Trek III: The Search for Spock; Star Trek)

"Jim. Your name is Jim."

- Spock (Star Trek III: The Search for Spock)

"If I were Human, I believe... my response would be 'Go to Hell.' If I were Human."

- Spock, giving his opinion on Starfleet's decision to retire the USS Enterprise and her crew (Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country)

"Billions of lives lost, because of me, Jim because... I failed."

-Spock, blaming himself for the destruction of Romulus and Vulcan in a mind meld with Kirk (Star Trek)

"Thrusters on full."

-A proud Spock, after watching Kirk being promoted to captain of the Enterprise (Star Trek)

"Space: the final frontier. These are the voyages of the starship Enterprise. Her ongoing mission: to explore strange new worlds, to seek out new lifeforms and new civilizations; to boldly go where no one has gone before."

- Spock (Star Trek)


=== Catchphrases ===
"Fascinating." (Star Trek: The Original Series)
"Live long and prosper." (Star Trek: The Original Series)
"Interesting."
"The needs of the many outweigh the needs of the few."


=== Kirk and Spock ===
"Have I ever mentioned you play a very irritating game of chess, Mr. Spock?"
"Irritating? Ah, yes: one of your Earth emotions."

- Kirk and Spock (TOS: "Where No Man Has Gone Before")

"Your illogical approach to chess does have its advantages on occasion, captain."
"I prefer to call it 'inspired'."
"As you wish."

- Spock and Kirk (TOS: "Charlie X")

"You'd make a splendid computer, Mr. Spock."
"That is very kind of you, captain!"

- Kirk and Spock (TOS: "The Return of the Archons")

"So, we're stranded here, in the middle of a Klingon occupation army."
"So it would seem. Not a very pleasant prospect."
"You have a gift for understatement, Mister Spock. It's not a very pleasant prospect at all."

- Kirk and Spock (TOS: "Errand of Mercy")

"You didn't really think I was going to beat his head in, did you?"
"I thought you might."
"You're right."

- Kirk and Spock (TOS: "Errand of Mercy")

"Well, Mr. Spock, if we can't disguise you, we'll find some way of explaining you."
"That should prove interesting."

- Kirk and Spock (TOS: "The City on the Edge of Forever")

"My friend is obviously Chinese. I see you've noticed the ears. They're actually easy to explain."
[Long pause.]
"Perhaps the unfortunate accident I had as a child."
"The 'unfortunate' accident he had as a child. He caught his head in a mechanical... rice picker."

- Kirk and Spock, attempting to explain Spock's appearance to a 20th century police officer (TOS: "The City on the Edge of Forever")

"Don't grieve, admiral. It's logical. The needs of the many... outweigh..."
"The needs of the few."
"Or the one. I never took the Kobayashi Maru test, until now. What do you think of my solution?"

-Spock and Kirk, as Spock is dying (Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan)

"You know, coming back in time, changing history... that's cheating.""A trick I learned from an old friend."

-Kirk and Spock (Star Trek)


== Awards and achievements ==

Twice decorated with the Starfleet Award of Valor (TOS: "Court Martial")
Vulcanian Scientific Legion of Honor (TOS: "Court Martial")
The Vulcan IDIC (TOS: "Is There in Truth No Beauty?")
An A-7 computer expert classification (TOS: "The Ultimate Computer")
Innovator of time travel methodologies: the warp drive cold start and the "slingshot" maneuver (TOS: "The Naked Time", "Tomorrow is Yesterday")
Twice recommended for commendations by Captain Kirk. (TOS: "Space Seed", "The Immunity Syndrome")