Surak was a legendary Vulcan philosopher, scientist, and logician, considered the greatest of all who ever lived on Vulcan and the father of the modern Vulcan civilization. (TOS: "The Savage Curtain")


== Life ==
Surak lived in the 4th century, during the Time of Awakening. (ENT: "The Forge") As a scientist, he was considered on the same level as Albert Einstein and Isaac Newton. (Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan)
Surak walked in Vulcan's Forge, beginning in the Gateway and crossing the Plain of Blood. His logic was said to have cooled it from the heat of battle. It was here that he founded the T'Karath Sanctuary. (ENT: "The Forge")
Surak told stories of the IDIC. He stated that the IDIC "had no end," and that its name was only a shadow of its true meaning. He was also an active mind melder. (ENT: "The Forge")
Surak's followers included T'Klaas, one of the first Kolinahr masters. (ENT: "Awakening")
During the Time of Awakening, Vulcan suffered from a series of devastating wars, which nearly destroyed the planet. In the early stages of what was to be another devastating war, Surak's followers sent emissaries to propose peace. Many of these emissaries were killed, but over time they achieved peace on their planet. (TOS: "The Savage Curtain")
Surak was killed in the last battle against "those who marched beneath the raptor's wings." (ENT: "The Forge") He died on Mount Seleya from radiation sickness caused by atomic weapons. (ENT: "Awakening")


== Surak's katra ==

Just prior to his death, Surak's katra was taken and housed in a katric ark. This ark was discovered in 2137 by Syrran, who became the holder of Surak's katra. With Surak's katra, Syrran founded the Syrrannite movement. (ENT: "The Forge")
Syrran melded with his followers, letting them all touch Surak's mind. Syrran died in 2154, during a sandfire storm, and transferred Surak's katra to Captain Jonathan Archer. (ENT: "The Forge")
Archer began having visions of Surak's time, and was able to find the T'Karath Sanctuary, the Kir'Shara, and identify the unnamed remains of T'Klaas. An attempt was made by T'Pau to remove Surak's katra from Archer, but it failed, as Surak wished to remain within Archer. (ENT: "Awakening")
After Archer finished his quest, Surak's katra was placed in the mind of another Vulcan priest. (ENT: "Kir'Shara")


== Surak's legacy ==

Surak's original writings (the "Kir'Shara") were believed to no longer exist by the 22nd century, although his followers made copies of his teachings. (ENT: "The Forge") These teachings led to the majority of Vulcans purging their emotions. (ENT: "The Andorian Incident") The Teachings of Surak were translated into English by Skon prior to 2152. (ENT: "Two Days and Two Nights")

As the Kir'Shara was lost after Surak's time, his true teachings were largely forgotten by the mainstream Vulcan society by the 22nd century, resulting in many considering it a myth, while several radical sects claimed to follow his "real" teachings. (ENT: "Kir'Shara") A group of Vulcans, for example, known as the V'tosh ka'tur, examined these writings, and believed that Surak wanted Vulcans to master their emotions, not purge them. Revering him, the V'tosh ka'tur carried a small statue of Surak aboard the Vulcan civilian transport ship Vahklas. (ENT: "Fusion") Another of these sects was the Syrranites.
After the Kir'Shara was discovered in 2154, it ushered in the Vulcan Reformation. (ENT: "Kir'Shara")
In the 22nd century, the Vulcans named a class of starships for Surak. (ENT: "Silent Enemy")
An image of Surak, drawn from the mind of Spock, was created by the Excalbians on Excalbia in 2268. (TOS: "The Savage Curtain")
In the mid-2270s, a long range shuttle used as a courier was named Surak. (Star Trek: The Motion Picture)
In 2285, David Marcus believed that, if Project Genesis had worked, his mother, Carol Marcus, would be remembered in the same breath as Isaac Newton, Albert Einstein, and Surak. (Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan)
Items from before his time were labeled as "pre-Surak" by the 24th century. (DS9: "In the Cards")