Sybok was the firstborn son of the Vulcan ambassador Sarek and a Vulcan princess during the first half of the 23rd century, and was the elder half-brother of Starfleet officer Spock. Sybok was a revolutionary, one of the V'tosh ka'tur, who sought experience and knowledge that were forbidden by Vulcan beliefs. At one time, when he was confined to a rehabilitation center, he was known by the alias "Xaverius". (SNW: "The Serene Squall")


== Early life ==
Sybok was born sometime before 2230. (Star Trek Beyond) Though his father Sarek was married to Amanda Grayson, a Human school teacher, he was born out of wedlock to a Vulcan princess. After the death of his mother, Sybok was raised by Sarek as a half-brother to Spock. As a young student, Sybok was considered to be exceptionally gifted, possessing great intelligence, and it was assumed that he would one day take his place among the great scholars of Vulcan.

However, Sybok rejected his logical upbringing and chose to embrace emotion like his ancestors, believing that the key to self-knowledge was emotion, not logic. When Sybok encouraged others to follow him, he was banished, never to return. For this reason, he was considered a V'tosh ka'tur, and eventually, his half-brother was told to avoid Sybok "at all costs." (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier; SNW: "The Serene Squall")
In 2259, he was confined to the Ankeshtan K'til Vulcan criminal rehabilitation center, on the third moon of Omicron Lyrae, under the alias "Xaverius" to protect Ambassador Sarek's reputation. Here, agents of the El-Keshtanktil (including T'Pring, Spock's betrothed) attempted to rehabilitate Sybok and other criminals by showing them the true path of Vulcan logic. Around this time, he was romantically involved with Angel, the leader of a band of pirates operating outside of Federation space. Angel sought to free their lover by capturing the USS Enterprise and holding Spock as hostage, using his relationship with T'Pring as leverage. However, this plan ultimately failed thanks to the efforts of Spock and Christine Chapel. (SNW: "The Serene Squall")


== Quest ==
During his studies, Sybok received visions given to him by an entity whom he believed to be God himself, and began a journey for a place in Vulcan mythology known as "Sha Ka Ree," from where all of existence was said to have originated. In 2287, Sybok's visions led him to Nimbus III.
During his travels, Sybok gained allies by asking the people he encountered to "share their pain" with him; he used the telepathic abilities inherent to his Vulcan heritage to help them relive traumatic experiences in their lives, allowing them to face and subsequently overcome their most deep-seated regrets.
These were very intense, powerful experiences that could sometimes be witnessed and shared by other people (as was the case with Captain Kirk, Spock, and Dr. McCoy). The recipients of Sybok's "therapy" were always thankful to be healed of their psychological trauma, and would readily join Sybok's quest out of gratitude toward him. This allowed Sybok to amass a large group of followers who dubbed themselves the Galactic Army of Light, and to easily capture Paradise City.

In an effort to gain access to a starship, Sybok subsequently kidnapped three ambassadors to Nimbus III – St. John Talbot of the Federation, General Korrd of the Klingon Empire, and Caithlin Dar of the Romulan Star Empire – and successfully manipulated them into joining him. This eventually led to a failed rescue attempt by the crew of the USS Enterprise-A, wherein Sybok was reunited with his brother, Spock. Commandeering the Enterprise, Sybok had the crew set a course for the center of the galaxy, where he believed Sha Ka Ree existed, beyond the Great Barrier.
Although Kirk insisted that the Enterprise would be destroyed attempting to penetrate the Barrier, Sybok was eventually vindicated when the ship was able to do so without incident, and discovered a planet on the other side. Traveling to the surface with Kirk, Spock, and McCoy, Sybok was eventually confronted with the fact that the being which had given him his visions was not, in fact, God, but rather a malevolent alien entity who had been imprisoned within the Great Barrier, and who had manipulated Sybok into providing him with a starship with which he might escape. Realizing that he had made a terrible mistake, Sybok confronted this being, sacrificing his own life to save the crew of the Enterprise. (Star Trek V: The Final Frontier)