Julian Subatoi Bashir was a 24th century Human Starfleet officer who served as chief medical officer of the Federation space station Deep Space 9.


== Childhood ==

Julian Bashir was born in late 2341, the only child of Richard and Amsha Bashir. As a child, he was known as "Jules," a name his parents called him well into adulthood. He stopped calling himself Jules when he was age 15 and referred to himself by his full first name, Julian. (DS9: "Doctor Bashir, I Presume")

One of Julian's most prized possessions as a child was his stuffed teddy bear, Kukalaka. When Julian was a boy, he took him everywhere he went. In 2346, at the tender age of five, Bashir performed his first surgery when he re-stuffed his well-worn Kukalaka. Bashir continued to hang on to Kukalaka well into his adulthood. (DS9: "The Quickening", "In the Cards", "Inquisition")

At age six, Bashir, in his own words, was "Small for my age, a bit awkward physically, not very bright. In the first grade, while the other children were learning how to read and write and use the computer, I was still trying to tell a dog from a cat, a tree from a house. I didn't really understand what was happening. I knew that I wasn't doing as well as my classmates. There were so many concepts that they took for granted that I couldn't begin to master and I didn't know why. All I knew was that I was a great disappointment to my parents."
In 2348, just before Julian's seventh birthday, the Bashir family left Earth for Adigeon Prime. At first, he was excited to see all the aliens in the hospital, but then they gave him a room and started a series of treatments. These treatments, known as "accelerated critical neural pathway formation," were a method of genetic engineering that involved the resequencing of his DNA. Over the course of two months, his genetic structure was manipulated to accelerate the growth of the neuronal networks in his cerebral cortex, and a new Julian Bashir was made.
The focus of his "enhancements" were to increase his mental abilities and as such, his IQ jumped five points a day for over two weeks. Further treatments led to improvements in his hand-eye coordination, reflexes, vision, stamina, height, and weight. Genetic augmentation of this kind was illegal in the Federation since the Eugenics Wars and the creation of the dangerous Augment known as Khan Noonien Singh, so the Bashirs kept Julian's enhancements secret. In the end, everything but his name had been altered in some way, Julian said.
The Bashirs returned to Earth and moved to a different city, where Julian was enrolled in a new school using falsified records his parents obtained somewhere. Instead of being the slowest learner in his class, Bashir was the star pupil. (DS9: "Doctor Bashir, I Presume", "Statistical Probabilities")
As a child, Bashir was afraid of doctors because they seemed to know everything, as if they held the power of life and death in their hands. He used to think that if he didn't behave, they would make him sick. (DS9: "Equilibrium") In 2351, at the age of ten, he was living with his family on Invernia II. He and his father got caught in an ionic storm and found shelter with a girl who became ill and later died because no one present knew that a nearby herb could have saved her. This memory further influenced Bashir's choice to become a doctor. (DS9: "Melora") As he got older, he decided that he wanted to know what doctors knew, to be as smart as they were. Upon furthering his education, he learned that all he really wanted to do was help people. (DS9: "Equilibrium")
In 2356, at the age of fifteen, Julian stopped calling himself Jules when he found out his parents had him genetically enhanced, believing that his parents had had him altered because they considered him defective. (DS9: "Doctor Bashir, I Presume")
Julian, however briefly, considered becoming a professional tennis player. Although good enough to play professionally, he decided to give it up and become a doctor instead, knowing that his parents would approve more of his career choice. He retained a passion for tennis throughout adulthood: along with medicine and biology, it was one of the things he knew most about, being able to geek out about the material composition of rackets. (DS9: "Distant Voices", "The Wire")


== Starfleet Medical Academy ==
While at Starfleet Medical Academy, Bashir took engineering extension classes that focused mainly on starship operations. (DS9: "Battle Lines", "Armageddon Game", "Distant Voices")
On New Year's Eve in 2367, Bashir attended a party at the home of Bruce Lucier, with his Andorian friend, Erit – Elizabeth Lense also attended. At the party, Erit (the Andorian) was pointed out to Lense as being Bashir, causing her to have mistaken Bashir for an Andorian for four years. (DS9: "Explorers")

While attending Starfleet Medical Academy, Bashir designed an incredible candy bar that was far superior in food value to Starfleet combat rations. (DS9: "The Siege")
Bashir was the captain of the Medical Academy racquetball team. His team won the sector championships in his final year. When he played against a Vulcan rival in his final match, however, he found his greatest opponents were the ones with no formal training. At another tournament, he picked up a five-thousand-year-old battle warm-up exercise from a top player. According to legend, the warm-up makes the heart a friend to the hand. (DS9: "Rivals")
Julian graduated in 2368 as salutatorian, missing one question on the final, where he mistook a preganglionic fiber for a postganglionic nerve during the oral exam phase of his Starfleet Medical finals. (DS9: "Emissary", "Q-Less", "Distant Voices") The valedictorian of his class was Elizabeth Lense. (DS9: "Explorers") Despite graduating salutatorian, he did graduate first in his class in pediatric medicine. (DS9: "To the Death")

After graduation, Bashir was offered the choice of any job in the fleet. He was also offered a position at a prestigious medical complex in Paris by its top administration, Mr. Delon, the father of Bashir's then-girlfriend, Palis Delon. He promised Bashir he would be chief of surgery within five years, which meant Bashir would have to give up his Starfleet career. Bashir came very close to taking the position but subsequently gave it up, as did Palis. (DS9: "Armageddon Game")


== Deep Space 9 ==

Choosing to stay in Starfleet, and not wanting a cushy job or a research grant, Bashir chose an assignment aboard Starbase Deep Space 9. At the time, it was one of the most remote outposts available, located beyond the farthest reaches of the Federation, allowing Bashir the chance to study "real frontier medicine". On stardate 46379, 27-year-old Lieutenant Junior Grade Bashir was transported to his new posting at Deep Space 9 by the USS Cochrane. It did not take Bashir long to experience frontier medicine. During the first week of the Federation take-over of Deep Space 9, the station was attacked by Gul Jasad of Cardassia, who believed that the station had destroyed a Cardassian vessel. The vessel had really entered a stable wormhole near the station. Bashir was called to the station's Promenade to treat the wounded. (DS9: "Emissary")
While serving on Deep Space 9, he met Elim Garak, a Cardassian tailor, who Bashir thought might have been a spy. (DS9: "Past Prologue") Bashir was enthralled by him and they became friends, with Bashir frequently trying to pry secrets from Garak. (DS9: "Past Prologue", "Cardassians", "The Wire")
Later that year, he accompanied Benjamin Sisko, Kira Nerys, and Kai Opaka on a journey through the Gamma Quadrant. They crash landed on a moon where war was eternal, and the combatants did not die. He, along with Miles O'Brien, visited a village on Bajor and helped the people pick a new Sirah to drive off the Dal'Rok, an energy being, from the village. (DS9: "Battle Lines", "The Storyteller")
During an away mission, Bashir rescued a Kobliad security officer from a burning ship. The criminal she was transporting transferred his mind into Bashir's mind and controlled Bashir into committing criminal acts, until he was driven out of his consciousness and destroyed. (DS9: "The Passenger")
At one point, Bashir became a Human game-piece in a Wadi game that Quark was forced to play to teach him a lesson in honesty. Quark believed that if he lost, his friends would die, but it was only a game. (DS9: "Move Along Home")
During an accident on the space station, Bashir saved the lives of a group of Federation ambassadors. (DS9: "The Forsaken")
He began a friendship with Elim Garak, the only Cardassian on the station. He saved his life by removing an implant from his brain that had been put there by Enabran Tain, the former head of the Obsidian Order. Together, they also exposed Gul Dukat's plot to embarrass Kotan Pa'Dar, whose son was left on Bajor during the Cardassian Withdrawal from the planet. (DS9: "The Wire", "Cardassians")
Bashir and O'Brien helped destroy the nano-biogenic weapons of the T'Lani and Kellerun. Officials of both races ordered the assassination of both men in order to make sure that the secrets of the weapons would not become known. (DS9: "Armageddon Game")
In 2370, he became the first Starfleet officer to cross over to the mirror universe in more than a hundred years. His counterpart was one of the leaders of the Terran Rebellion against the Alliance. (DS9: "Crossover")
He unknowingly took part in a fixed racquetball game against O'Brien. A swindler had opened a new bar on the station and was hurting Quark's business. Bashir was the favorite in the game, and by fixing it so O'Brien won, would have garnered Quark huge profits. (DS9: "Rivals")

In 2371, Bashir, along with Jadzia Dax and Sisko, was accidentally transported back in time. They went back three hundred years to the time of the Bell Riots on Earth. It was a time of social upheaval and they were instrumental in helping the government become aware of the poor. Later in 2371, he was attacked by Altovar, a Lethean who was attempting to steal bio-mimetic gel from the infirmary. The Lethean's telepathic attack put Bashir into a coma, but Bashir managed to fight his way back to consciousness. Shortly thereafter, he helped O'Brien expose a Romulan plot to destroy the wormhole through a series of time jumps. (DS9: "Past Tense, Part I", "Past Tense, Part II", "Distant Voices", "Visionary")
After an attack by the Jem'Hadar, the USS Defiant was heavily damaged. Bashir and Dax were trapped in a turbolift, with a limited supply of air. Just as their air ran out, they were freed from the lift. (DS9: "Starship Down")
During the war with the Klingons, Bashir saw war close up. He attended to the wounded on a colony attacked by the Klingons. With limited medical facilities, he was still able to treat and save many of the wounded. (DS9: "Nor the Battle to the Strong")
Bashir was promoted to full lieutenant in 2372. Early that year, Bashir participated in drills aboard Deep Space 9, in preparation for potential Changeling infiltrators, where he coordinated phaser sweeps of the Promenade. On stardate 49011, Bashir prepared his staff for the pending Klingon assault on the station. (DS9: "The Way of the Warrior")
On stardate 49066, Bashir and Chief O'Brien conducted a mission to the Gamma Quadrant that included a bio-survey of Merik III. En route to the Bajoran wormhole, their runabout, the Rubicon, detected a subspace magneton pulse in the Bopak system. The source was later determined to be coming from a Jem'Hadar attack ship, located on the planet Bopak III. (DS9: "Hippocratic Oath")

Later that year, Bashir was at a burn treatment conference on Meezan IV. He went to bed one night and woke up in the Dominion Internment Camp 371. Meanwhile, a Changeling had replaced the doctor aboard the station for over a month. (DS9: "In Purgatory's Shadow") The Changeling Bashir remained aboard Deep Space 9, secretly laying the pieces of a plan to trigger a supernova in the Bajoran sun with a bomb composed of trilithium, tekasite, and protomatter, in order to wipe out a large chunk of the combined Alpha Quadrant fleet at once. When the time came, the Changeling Bashir hijacked the runabout Yukon to perform his mission, but at about the same time, the real Bashir and his fellow prisoners escaped the internment camp. Bashir was able to alert the station that the other Bashir was a fake just in time, and the Changeling plot was thwarted by the Defiant. (DS9: "By Inferno's Light")
Bashir enjoyed the holosuites at Quark's. One of his favorite programs was a spy novel, with Bashir in the title role. When the explosion from a sabotaged runabout blew out the station's transporter, Michael Eddington was forced to save the patterns of Sisko, Dax, Kira, O'Brien, and Worf in the station's computer. Their neural patterns took up so much space in the main computer that it had to store their physical patterns in the holosuite Bashir was running, causing the senior staff to appear as characters in his program. (DS9: "Our Man Bashir")

Bashir's genetically engineered status was revealed in 2373, after Lewis Zimmerman chose him to be the template for the Long-term Medical Holographic program. Bashir was nearly expelled from Starfleet service upon this revelation, due to regulations barring any genetically augmented personnel from serving in their ranks, citing the danger that "for every Julian Bashir that can be created, there's a Khan Singh waiting in the wings." However, a special exception was eventually made provided Bashir's father accept incarceration for violation of eugenics laws, which he did. Their interactions during this stressful period eventually brought Bashir and his parents closer together - they had been estranged from each other for years because Bashir thought they had had him genetically enhanced as a child because they were disappointed by him. (DS9: "Doctor Bashir, I Presume")
Bashir later encountered other genetically enhanced Humans who had undergone the same accelerated critical neural pathway formation process he did as a child. Their enhancements left them as savants who were confined to a specialized Institute and unable to function in normal society, where their "genetic status" prevented them from joining Starfleet or performing certain professions in the Federation. However, Bashir encouraged them to find ways to be productive members of society; but after they briefly considered forcing Starfleet to surrender to the Dominion to prevent undue bloodshed, Bashir managed to convince them to return to the Institute. (DS9: "Statistical Probabilities")


=== Dominion War ===
Bashir participated in numerous military operations during the war. He was with Sisko when they destroyed the ketracel-white storage depot. The Jem'Hadar ship they used suffered heavy damage and lost its warp drive. When the ship crashed, it was on a planet where a Jem'Hadar ship had previously crashed. A battle ensued between the crews. Elim Garak and Nog were captured by the Jem'Hadar. But with Keevan, the Vorta leader hurt, they were released in exchange for Bashir treating Keevan. Bashir operated on him and saved his life. Keevan then betrayed his forces because he had run out of ketracel-white and worried that the Jem'Hadar would kill him. (DS9: "A Time to Stand", "Rocks and Shoals")

Bashir took part in the recapturing of the station and driving the Dominion back to Cardassian space. Later that year, he was a part of Worf's and Jadzia's wedding. He and O'Brien used Ma'Stakas to attack Worf and Jadzia at the end of the wedding, which was a Klingon tradition (as well as an opportunity for the two to vent their frustrations over the trials and suffering endured during the symbolic lead-up to the wedding ceremony itself). While studying genetically-engineered Humans, he learned from them that the attempt by the Dominion to open peace talks and cede territory was a ruse in order to acquire planets that could help produce ketracel-white. (DS9: "Favor the Bold", "Sacrifice of Angels", "You Are Cordially Invited", "Statistical Probabilities")
Bashir took part in the defense of AR-558, which was a planet that guarded the supply route of the Federation. He found a cure for the virus that Section 31 infected Odo with, saving Odo's life. Bashir took part in the final battle of the war. After the war was won by the Federation Alliance, Bashir said goodbye to his friend, Miles O'Brien and began a relationship with Ezri Dax. (DS9: "The Siege of AR-558", "Extreme Measures", "What You Leave Behind")


=== Research projects ===

On stardate 46578, Bashir boarded the USS Enterprise-D to access its computer's bio-imaging systems in sickbay, following the discovery of what he believed was a medical scanner discovered in the Gamma Quadrant. With the assistance of Commanders Data and La Forge, they ran a full circuit pathway diagnostic on the device in engineering. While working with Data, Bashir became interested in cybernetic research. Bashir was fascinated by all the trouble his creator took to make Data, who he referred to as a "synthetic lifeform", seem "Human". He was especially surprised by how "personable" Data was, and among other things, questioned Data about whether his hair grew, and observed that Data was "breathing" and had a "pulse", questions that Data had never been asked before, people being more focused on how he was different from Humans rather than how he was similar to them.
During their investigation of the device, it emitted a plasma shock that overloaded Data's positronic net, activating a series of previously dormant circuits that subsequently allowed Data the ability to dream. With Data's permission, Bashir took this opportunity to author a paper on the subject with the intentions of getting published in the Starfleet Cybernetics Journal. (TNG: "Birthright, Part I")
One of Bashir's notable projects was on biomolecular replication. His work was submitted by Jadzia Dax and later nominated by the Federation Medical Council for 2371's Carrington Award for his work, which was, according to Dax, "both audacious and groundbreaking." This made Bashir the youngest nominee in the history of the Carrington Award. He was honored to be nominated, but felt that the undeniable truth was that he was far too young to be a serious candidate for the award. (DS9: "Prophet Motive")

Another of Bashir's early research topics on Deep Space 9 was an immuno-therapy project of T-cell anomalies conducted on Bajor. Doctor Lense had read Bashir's research and was extremely interested in his work. (DS9: "Explorers")
While on Bopak III, Goran'Agar, a Jem'Hadar, implored Bashir to conduct some scientific research in order to find the cure for their addiction to ketracel-white. Bashir agreed, and initially tested for potential matches containing the molecular structure of the enzyme receptors in the Jem'Hadar's bodies. Upon further investigation, it was determined that there was no cure on the planet and that Goran'Agar was a genetic anomaly. (DS9: "Hippocratic Oath")
Another project Bashir worked on at this time was a treatment for the Teplan blight, a fearsome bioweapon used by the Dominion to punish at least one planet, Teplan, for resisting them. However, his initial attempt to treat a number of patients ended disastrously with Bashir discovering too late that Dominion had prepared the weapon to fatally accelerate its symptoms when subjected to the electromagnetic fields of modern medical equipment. Although deeply despondent at this failure, Bashir inadvertently discovered an in-vitro vaccine that would allow the population to give birth to children immune to the blight. Despite this breakthrough, which earned a commendation from his superiors, Bashir still researched the disease for some time before apparently giving up and presumably delegating the project to Starfleet Medical. (DS9: "The Quickening")
By 2373, he was working on two studies of prion replication in ganglionic cell clusters. (DS9: "Doctor Bashir, I Presume")


== Section 31 ==
In late 2374, Bashir was selected by Luther Sloan, a member of the covert Federation intelligence group, Section 31, as a potential operative. While the crew of DS9 believed he was attending a medical conference on Casperia Prime, he was abducted by the group and placed in a holographic simulation to determine his potential of being a Section 31 operative. Although offered a position as part of their organization, he turned down the offer. However, Sisko ordered him to join Section 31 as a double agent. (DS9: "Inquisition")
A year later, Bashir was contacted by Sloan to serve as an operative for Section 31 during Bashir's trip to lecture at a conference on Romulus. Sloan led Bashir to believe that he was planning to assassinate the chairman of the Tal Shiar, Koval. In reality, it was an operation to prevent Kimara Cretak from ascending to a position on the Continuing Committee. (DS9: "Inter Arma Enim Silent Leges")
Several months later, Bashir and O'Brien realized that Section 31 was responsible for the morphogenic virus that was killing the Founders of the Dominion, as well as their friend Odo. Bashir sent a false message to Starfleet Medical, informing them that he had found a "cure". Sloan traveled to Deep Space 9 with the intent of destroying the cure. Bashir and O'Brien were successful in restraining him and, using Romulan mind probes, were successful in extracting the cure from Sloan's mind before he died. (DS9: "Extreme Measures")


== Physiology ==
Due to his genetic enhancements, Julian, in many ways, possessed a superior physiology to other Humans. His intellect was the most obvious example of this, as he was able to perform complex computations faster than a computer (DS9: "A Time to Stand", "Rocks and Shoals"), and his total recall was almost absolute. (DS9: , "Inter Arma Enim Silent Leges") This also made him one of a few Humans who could play Tongo on a Ferengi level, and he got to the point that he could beat several experienced Ferengi after a few games. (DS9: "Extreme Measures", "Change of Heart")
Physically he was also enhanced, although his physical abilities were mostly less remarkable. His hand-eye coordination was greatly enhanced to the point where he could hit the smallest part of a dartboard with ease at over eight feet, (DS9: "Doctor Bashir, I Presume", "Extreme Measures") his hearing was also enhanced beyond that of a normal Human (DS9: "Statistical Probabilities"), and his strength and reflexes were at least on par with a Vulcan's. (DS9: "Take Me Out to the Holosuite")
In 2375, Koval found that as an apparent result of Bashir's enhanced parietal cortex, his brain's neurocellular structure was not susceptible to Romulan mind probes. (DS9: "Inter Arma Enim Silent Leges")
He also had limited control of his vital signs, although he lost control if significantly weakened. (DS9: "Extreme Measures")


== Legacy ==
In 3195, Julian Bashir was listed with other luminaries of Starfleet Academy on a commemoration wall in the USS Athena. (SA: "Kids These Days" set decoration)


== Personal life ==


=== Family ===
One of Bashir's early ancestors was the 15th century poet, Singh el Bashir. (DS9: "Statistical Probabilities")
Bashir's great-grandmother's name was Watley, and she served as a Starfleet officer during the mid-23rd century. In 2373, when the USS Defiant traveled back to 2268 by way of the Orb of Time, he encountered a Lieutenant Watley aboard the USS Enterprise. Bashir became momentarily convinced that Lieutenant Watley was his great-grandmother, and that he may be facing a predestination paradox. Since no one ever knew his great-grandfather, he thought that he might be destined to fall in love with Lieutenant Watley and become his own great-grandfather. (DS9: "Trials and Tribble-ations")
Bashir did not have a positive relationship with his parents for many years. Bashir believed his parents had had him genetically enhanced as a child because they were disappointed by him. He lived his life as a child and a young adult to try to please his parents, even choosing a medical career because of them instead of one in tennis. His father thought that Bashir considered himself better than his parents because of the enhancements. They would often argue, and Bashir felt compelled to stay away from his parents. He blamed them for changing him and he felt "unnatural", a "freak". Both Bashir and his parents misunderstood each other, however: Bashir's parents had had him genetically enhanced because they loved him and were worried about him, fearing that they had somehow passed down some unknown genetic difficulties to their son; and Bashir didn't think himself better than his parents, but along with thinking his parents were disappointed in him, believed his father didn't take responsibility for the problems he brought on himself and his family. When the family secret about Bashir's illegal enhancements became public by accident, Bashir's father brokered a deal with Starfleet to be incarcerated so that Bashir could retain his position in Starfleet. Their interactions during this stressful time brought the family closer together and helped them understand each other. (DS9: "Doctor Bashir, I Presume", "Distant Voices")


=== Friendships ===


==== Miles O'Brien ====

Bashir's best friend was Miles O'Brien. At first, they did not get along; O'Brien felt that Bashir was annoying. This all changed when both men were marked for assassination after helping to destroy biological weapons. O'Brien was wounded, and Bashir helped save him. They enjoyed playing darts and racquetball. Together they had many adventures in the holosuites, the most noteworthy being the Battle of Britain and The Alamo. They even built a scale model of the Battle of the Alamo. (DS9: "The Storyteller", "Armageddon Game", "Rivals", "Homefront", "The Changing Face of Evil")

When O'Brien was given twenty years of prison memories for a crime he did not commit by the Argrathi and could not adjust, he attempted to kill himself. One of the false memories was that he had killed his best friend in prison. It was Bashir who was able to talk him out of the attempt and get him help. Bashir was dismayed when during the final battle of the Dominion War, O'Brien told him he was leaving for Earth to become a professor at Starfleet Academy. (DS9: "Hard Time", "What You Leave Behind")
Although Bashir fell in love with Ezri Dax in 2375, he confessed that he liked Miles "a little bit more", indicating the strong bond of friendship that formed between the two over their seven years of service together on Deep Space 9. (DS9: "Extreme Measures")


==== Martok ====
Martok and Bashir were both prisoners at Internment Camp 371. Ever since their escape, Martok had always trusted and respected Bashir's medical expertise.


==== Elim Garak ====

Bashir struck up an unlikely friendship with Elim Garak. He was interested in him because he thought Garak might be a spy. Garak first introduced himself to Bashir during the Tahna Los incident on the station, in such a flirtatious way it confused Bashir and left him quite flustered. They worked together to expose a plot by Dukat to embarrass a Cardassian official who wished to reconcile Cardassia with Bajor.
They had many lunches together. It was during one of these luncheons that Bashir discovered an implant that was killing Garak and he was able to save him. Bashir and Garak often discussed literature during their lunches and frequently debated the differences between Human and Cardassian written works. Garak also became Bashir's sidekick in Bashir's holoprogram about international spies. Together, they saw many combat duties during the Dominion War. (DS9: "Past Prologue", "Cardassians", "The Wire", "Distant Voices", "Our Man Bashir")


=== Relationships ===


==== Jadzia Dax ====

Bashir was infatuated with Dax from the very beginning, when they met on a transport to Deep Space 9, and since then desperately pursued her. Quark once said of Bashir as being there every other day "crying into his synthale over her". (DS9: "Emissary", "Playing God") She enjoyed his flirtatious attempts to become intimately involved with her, and according to Ezri Dax, would have entered a romantic relationship with him had Worf not come along. (DS9: "Emissary", "A Man Alone", "Starship Down", "Afterimage")


==== Melora Pazlar ====
Melora was an Elaysian who was briefly commissioned to Deep Space 9. She and Bashir had a brief romantic affair, during which Bashir worked on a way to adapt Nathaniel Tero's neuromuscular adaptation theory into a working, long-term solution to Melora's gravity problems. Melora ends up pulling the plug on the treatment, as she wants to be able to return home. She leaves the station and her and Bashir's relationship presumably ends. (DS9: "Melora")


==== Leeta ====

Leeta first showed interest in Bashir in 2371, faking a cold in order to meet him. (DS9: "Explorers")
They broke up a year later, in 2373 and went to Risa to complete the Bajoran Rite of Separation. (DS9: "Let He Who Is Without Sin...")
Later that year, Nog helped Bashir retrieve his teddy bear, Kukalaka, from Leeta, who had failed to give it back after their break-up. (DS9: "In the Cards")


==== Sarina Douglas ====
Bashir first met Sarina Douglas when he was studying a group of genetically-enhanced Humans. (DS9: "Statistical Probabilities")
The following year, he helped restore her to a normal life by using a neurocortical probe, helping her relate to other Humans. He fell in love with her, and she appeared to fall in love with him as well. In the end, Julian's affection for her almost drove her back into seclusion, so he let her go. (DS9: "Chrysalis")


==== Ezri Dax ====

When Ezri arrived on the station, Bashir was drawn to her because she carried Jadzia's memories. At first, they tried to avoid each other. But nothing could stop their attraction to each other, culminating in a passionate kiss in a turbolift on the way up to Ops. An annoyed Worf sent them back down, but they didn't appear to notice. They spent their first romantic night together on the eve of the final battle of the Dominion War. (DS9: "The Dogs of War", "What You Leave Behind")


== Alternate realities and timelines ==
In 2371, Chief Miles O'Brien experienced a series of alternate timelines after becoming infected with delta-series radioisotopes following an accident aboard Deep Space 9. This, coupled with the presence of a cloaked Romulan warbird nearby, had the effect of shifting him forward in time by several hours. In one timeline, O'Brien died due to the damage that the radioisotopes did to the basilar arteries in his brain stem which was not discovered until Bashir performed an autopsy on him after having tried and failed to save O'Brien for over an hour. Bashir warned the time-displaced O'Brien who had the past Bashir perform a basilar arterial scan, allowing him to fix the damage in time. In another timeline, the station was destroyed by the warbird and it's unknown if Bashir was one of the personnel who managed to escape or not. (DS9: "Visionary")

In an alternate timeline created in 2373, the USS Defiant was thrown several hundred years in the past, where it crash-landed on the planet Gaia in the year 2173. After the crash, Bashir married one of the ships' crewmembers, Angie Kirby. After several generations, the colony encountered the Defiant once again, where Bashir learned that the planet was "crawling with Bashirs". He made a special point to get down to the planet to meet some of his descendants. While on the surface, Bashir surveyed of the settlement's clinic to determine what supplies needed to be left behind, where he met his great-great-great-great granddaughter: the doctor. She made quite a fuss over Bashir, whose "healing touch" was something of a legend on the planet. (DS9: "Children of Time")
In a future alternate timeline, during the early-2400s, Bashir held the rank of full commander, and was among the crew aboard the USS Defiant that traveled to the Bajoran system in an attempt to recreate the conditions that caused the disappearance of Captain Sisko. It was revealed during this timeline that he had multiple offspring. Bashir also commented on how long it had been since he used a two-dimensional control panel, and later suggested they drop by Morn's bar for a drink. (DS9: "The Visitor")


== Holograms ==
Bashir was holographically duplicated at least once in the prime universe.

In 2373, Doctor Lewis Zimmerman based his initial test version of the Long-term Medical Holographic program on Bashir's likeness. (DS9: "Doctor Bashir, I Presume")
In an alternate universe, an Emergency Medical Hologram of Bashir was present aboard the Anaximander, and married to a version of Elim Garak from a different reality than the one of the hologram's origin. (LD: "Fissure Quest")


== Memorable quotes ==
See: I'm a doctor, not a...