Lydia Anderson was a Starfleet crewman on USS Voyager assigned to engineering and the security division during its time in the Delta Quadrant.
In 2371 she was part of the security team which accompanied Janeway to the airponics bay to stop Kes, who transported herself back in time. Anderson and the other security officer got into a firefight with boarding Vidiians. (VOY: "Fury")
She was present in the hallucination Captain Kathryn Janeway experienced in 2373 about her death and funeral. (VOY: "Coda")
In 2374, Anderson was among the crewmembers in the mess hall who were awaiting a letter from home, sent through the Hirogen communications network. (VOY: "Hunters")
She was one of the security officers who stood guard on deck 11 where a wounded member of Species 8472 was held behind a force field. (VOY: "Prey")
In 2375, Anderson and Timothy Lang escorted Tom Paris to the brig. (VOY: "Thirty Days")
She was with Russell in Voyager's corridors when the captain demanded maximum efficiency from Seven of Nine. (VOY: "Dark Frontier")
At the end of the year, Anderson and a security officer opened fire on Captain Ransom and his crew until they fell wounded. (VOY: "Equinox")
Anderson again aimed a phaser rifle when she was called in as security into the transporter room to welcome several crewmembers of the Equinox aboard Voyager. (VOY: "Equinox, Part II")
She was walking in the corridor in 2376 when the tone of a discussion between Alice and Tom Paris rose noticeably. (VOY: "Alice")
Anderson, with a different hairstyle, was one of the security officers, who welcomed Seven of Nine and the Hirogen Tsunkatse fighter aboard Voyager, where she pointed a phaser rifle onto them. (VOY: "Tsunkatse")
She was in the mess hall when B'Elanna Torres, accompanied by Janeway, requested all crewmembers to stop eating because there was a contaminant in the replicator system. (VOY: "Live Fast and Prosper")
Anderson was on duty in engineering in 2377 when Tom Paris entered to tell B'Elanna Torres about the captain's decision to let him participate in the Antarian Trans-stellar Rally. (VOY: "Drive")
In 2377, she was part of the security team which accompanied Janeway and the Beta Hirogen to the transporter room. (VOY: "Flesh and Blood")
Anderson was working in engineering when the Voyager landed on a planet in the Delta Quadrant. (VOY: "Nightingale")
The same year, Anderson served as security guard for two injured prisoners who were beamed directly into sickbay. She remained guarding the sickbay along with Ayala. (VOY: "Repentance")
Soon after, she was brainwashed by the Quarren after they irradiated Voyager and forced the evacuation of its crew. She, along with most of the rest of the crew, spent approximately three weeks in the largest city on Quarra. Her memories were altered and she was unaware that she had been kidnapped. Anderson appeared in Tuvok's computer file. (VOY: "Workforce", "Workforce, Part II")
She was working in engineering when Q threw an impromptu party there. (VOY: "Q2")
Anderson was among the crewmembers in the mess hall when Neelix handed out isolinear chips with different numbers to every crewmember which allowed them to have free call time to people on Earth including their families and friends. (VOY: "Author, Author")

She was among the crewmembers who stood in the hallway to bid farewell to Neelix when he left the ship for Dexa and Brax. (VOY: "Homestead")
She passed Harry Kim and Tom Paris in a corridor when Kim asked Paris to join him in "one last mission" before he becomes a father. later, she was working in engineering when B'Elanna Torres and Tom Paris talked about their future and the birthplace of their daughter. (VOY: "Endgame")


== Appearances ==