Captain Nahla Ake was a Human-Lanthanite hybrid. She had an long and storied career in Starfleet, most notably serving as the Chancellor of Starfleet Academy in the late 32nd century. (SA: "Kids These Days")


== Biography ==


=== Early life ===
Ake was born in 2773 to a Lanthanite father and a Human mother. (SA: "Kids These Days", "Come, Let's Away")
Ake lived for a time in the Janaran Sanctuary on Betazed. She called the planet "paradise". (SA: "Beta Test")


=== Starfleet career ===
Ake's Starfleet personnel files were "longer than War and Peace and so much more insane." (SA: "Vox In Excelso")
Ake attended Starfleet Academy in the 28th century. She took part in a legendary prank in which the entire first year class was beamed from the sonic showers to the roof of Alcatraz. It took the faculty half a day to get everyone down. (SA: "Vitus Reflux")


==== After the Burn ====
Ake lost her son, who was a cadet at Starfleet Academy, in the Burn. Ake received a distress call from her son's ship, but chose not to respond in order to save her own crew. (SA: "Kids These Days", "Come, Let's Away")
In 3180, Captain Ake served as the ranking officer at the Federation outpost of Pikaru. She presided over the cases of Nus Braka and Anisha Mir, who had been apprehended after a theft that involved the murder of a Starfleet officer. Despite Anisha only having been an accomplice and in care of a young son, Caleb, Ake reluctantly sentenced her and Braka to a penal colony. Ake attempted to see to Caleb's welfare, but Caleb escaped Pikaru shortly after and disappeared after stealing her combadge.
Ake came to deeply regret following the word of law over her conscience in separating a mother and child, and resigned from Starfleet. She became a teacher at Little Blooms on Bajor, all the while searching for Caleb's whereabouts. (SA: "Kids These Days") While living on Bajor, she noted the reverence with which the Bajorans treated the figure of Benjamin Sisko. (SA: "Series Acclimation Mil")


==== Chancellor of Starfleet Academy ====
In 3195, Fleet Admiral Charles Vance offered Ake the position of Chancellor at the newly recommissioned Starfleet Academy, now split between its original San Francisco campus and the USS Athena. To convince her to accept, Vance informed Ake that Caleb had been incarcerated on Toroth. Traveling to Toroth, Ake used the Federation's treaty with the Torothans to commute Caleb's sentence to enlistment in Starfleet Academy and convinced him to accept her offer by informing him of his mother's escape from prison a year prior.
Ake traveled with Caleb to the Athena, where she became acquainted with her bridge crew. But en route to Earth, the Athena diverted to investigate a spatial anomaly, only to fall into a trap set by the Venari Ral led by Nus Braka, who revealed that Caleb sent a transmission to his mother that enabled him to find them. Braka threatened Ake to clear Engineering so his crew could dismantle her warp drive. However, Caleb came up with a plan to disable Braka's programmable matter, so Ake ordered a Ramcon Six simulation to fake a warp core breach to Braka and his crew to beam out. Though Braka saw through the lie and confronted Caleb, he was able to restore the Athena's systems, enabling them to destroy Braka's ship, though the Venari Ral leader managed to reach an Athena escape pod.
After the Athena arrived at Starfleet Academy campus, Ake brokered a deal with the hearing committee who judged Caleb's actions and told him that he would be restricted to campus for 90 days with 100 hours of menial labor. (SA: "Kids These Days")


== Personal life ==
Ake disliked footwear and would go without whenever possible. According to her, "Bare feet pick up electrons that reduce inflammation, up white blood cells and cytokines, and stimulate brain activity." Her tolerance for spicy food was extremely high as she had "burned off [her] nerve endings" in the 29th century. (SA: "Beta Test")
In the 3090s, Ake became romantically involved with the young Klingon diplomat Obel Wochak. The relationship ended as neither was willing to leave their position to be together. (SA: "Vox In Excelso")