Doctor Sarah April was a 23rd century Human female who served as the first chief medical officer aboard the USS Enterprise, under the command of her husband, Captain Robert April, from 2245 to 2250. (TAS: "The Counter-Clock Incident")


== Biography ==
At some point during her life, Sarah joined Starfleet. In 2245, she was assigned to the USS Enterprise as the chief medical officer under the command of Captain Robert April. The two eventually fell in love and got married. 

As Enterprise's CMO, Dr. April was something of a pioneer, designing a number of new procedures and medical instruments, largely out of her own necessity. As of 2270, many of her innovations were still used in starship sickbays.
She and her husband were traveling to Babel for the Ambassador-at-Large's retirement party when a ship was flying into the Beta Niobe supernova at warp 36. Upon the Enterprise's entry through the supernova, she was also the first to notice the strange time-reversing properties of the reverse universe; her Capellan flower, which only moments before had been dying, had bloomed anew.
When she, Robert, and the crew of the Enterprise found themselves growing biologically younger, she looked after the "children" while Robert took command of the ship once more. After returning to their universe again, she expressed a desire to live her life over again, but Robert talked her out of it, saying that such a chance an opportunity was for those whose lives were unfulfilled. He didn't believe they could possibly improve on what they had already been to each other, a statement which elicited a kiss from her. (TAS: "The Counter-Clock Incident")


== Memorable quotes ==
"Captain Kirk, the Capellan flower."
"I'm sure Captain Kirk has other problems besides your flower, dear."
"You don't understand. Before we entered this universe it was about to die and-and now it's in full bloom again."
"How is that possible?"
"It's as if it were growing younger again. I-I can almost feel it while I-I'm holding it."

- Sarah April, Robert April, and James Kirk
"But what about us? We don't have to use the transporter. We can remain young, live our lives over again. You could command a starship once more." 
"What a blessing to be able to live one's life over again, if the life you've led has left you unfulfilled. No Sarah, I don't want to live it all over again. I couldn't improve one bit on what we've had together." 
"Oh, Robert." 

- Sarah April and Robert April

"Our trip into the negative universe gave it [the flower] a second life. It gave all of us a second life."

- Sarah April to her husband Robert April