Commander Valerie Archer was the identity assumed by a member of Species 8472 in the mid-2370s in a training simulation designed to accurately simulate Earth and Starfleet Headquarters. (VOY: "In the Flesh")


== History ==
Following their encounter with the USS Voyager in 2374, a group of Species 8472, on space platforms called terraspheres, created a simulation of Starfleet Headquarters on Earth. The polymorphed members of Species 8472 were conducting a role-playing mission to better understand their enemy, the Federation and Starfleet. Valerie Archer was one of the officers impersonated by Species 8472.
The impersonated Archer accepted being called a Starfleet brat by Commander Chakotay, with both of her parents being officers. By the time she was ten, Archer had seen half the quadrant.
The impersonated Archer took up many interests in humanoid culture, including such reading material as Beyond the Galactic Edge, Humanity's Quest for Infinity, the writings of George Bernard Shaw and A Cave Beyond Logic: Vulcan Perspectives on Platonic Thought. She was also partial to Klingon martinis.
In 2375, Chakotay, posing as Commander Jason Hayek, encountered Archer on Terrasphere 8. Chakotay attempted to discover what Species 8472 was planning by developing a rapport with Archer. During their first meeting, an officer began to uncontrollably morph back to his original form. Archer asked Chakotay whether he had ever reverted. She also told him that she disliked breathing oxygen and sleeping as if she were Human. Later, on a date with Chakotay, she gave herself an isomorphic injection in the thigh in order to maintain her form. Chakotay discussed with her whether it was necessary to invade Earth, and Archer stated that Humans had allied themselves with the Borg and must be destroyed. Archer wanted to give Chakotay a goodnight kiss, wondering what it would be like. When she kissed him, she rubbed her hands on his face. A scan of her hand revealed that Chakotay was Human.
While initially suspicious of each other and using the other for reconnaissance purposes, a genuine romantic and respectful relationship developed between Archer and Chakotay during the course of their interactions. Their evident mutual respect and trust was persuasive to their superiors during the subsequent diplomatic engagment between Voyager and Species 8472 to try to avoid conflict. After Captain Kathryn Janeway and Species 8472 reached an agreement and settled their differences, Chakotay and Archer, expressing their regret at having to part, kissed once again. Chakotay was impressed with her mastery of the art of kissing. (VOY: "In the Flesh")