The Enterprise crew discovers a young Human boy being raised by the aliens who killed his parents.


== Summary ==


=== Teaser ===
"Captain's log, Stardate 44143.7. We have moved into Sector 21947 in response to a distress call from a Talarian observation craft. The alien vessel appears adrift, and our initial scans have detected a life-threatening radiation leak within its propulsion system."

As the USS Enterprise-D approaches the Talarian craft, Worf informs Captain Picard that there is no response from the vessel and Picard orders that an open channel be maintained. Doctor Crusher and her medical team are standing by to beam onboard the Talarian vessel. However, Data provides a warning by noting that this may be a well-known Talarian tactic as evidenced during the Talarian war. The Talarians would abandon their vessels, rig them to self-destruct, and send out a distress call. Troi senses life on board, which is rapidly fading. Despite Data's warning, Picard decides to send the away team over to the craft.
When Worf, Riker, Crusher, Martinez, and other medics board the ship, they discover five Talarian males, all wearing uniforms, who are unconscious with radiation burns. They conclude it is a training ship and beam them all to sickbay, but not before Doctor Crusher finds one of the boys is Human.


=== Act One ===
"Captain's log, supplemental. We have completed an emergency evacuation of four Talarians and one Human. How this young man found himself in the company of these aliens remains a mystery."
During their treatment, all of the Talarians and the Human boy are first still and silent, despite being talked to by the doctor and nurses. Suddenly, they all begin rocking and howling. Only when Captain Picard comes in and commands them to stop loudly do they all stop. The boy is silent until he hears Picard addressed as captain. He then admits his name is Jono and requests formally to return home to his captain, Endar.
When Picard talks to Doctor Crusher in her office, she explains other medical findings, in addition to the radiation: two previously fractured ribs, a broken arm, and a low-grade concussion, all sustained during the past seven years. She believes that he has been with the Talarians for some time, since he has assimilated their culture, and it is they who could have brutalized him to cause the injuries.
As they talk, Troi suggests that Jono takes off his gloves so that they can examine him further, but Jono begins to behave erratically by running away and yelling. Picard and Crusher rush in to stop Jono from resisting further medical examination, again by commanding him to stop struggling. In the middle of it, they receive a subspace message from Starfleet. Picard and Crusher leave to hear it.
In the meantime, Worf takes Jono to his quarters and Jono asks why he would respond to a woman, Dr. Crusher. Worf explains that he is outranked by her, and Jono says that females would never outrank a male in his society. Worf explains that Jono is not Talarian, but Human, and is confused. Then Jono makes the "B'Nar," the wailing noise that all Talarians make when they are in distress. Worf leaves him once he starts making the noise.
In the observation lounge, Picard learns that the boy is the grandson of Admiral Rossa – Jeremiah Rossa, the son of Connor and Moira Rossa. The crew concludes that the boy must rediscover his Human identity, and that Picard – the only one he has listened to so far – must be the one to help him do it. Picard initially disagrees because he is not good with children. Troi convinces him otherwise because Jono has only ever responded to him.


=== Act Two ===
Picard goes to Jono to attempt to bond with him in some way. Jono finds his quarters like a cage, and still wants to perform the B'Nar. Picard orders him to stop and asks what he can do instead. Jono says he always lived with his captain, which Picard immediately resists, but nevertheless he accepts Jono to his quarters. He immediately picks at Picard's artifacts, which Picard is not accustomed to. Instead, Picard asks why he will not take his gloves off, and Jono says that it is because he does not wish to touch aliens. He then gently asks if his captain ever hurt him, but Jono explains pain does not matter, but rather passing "the tests." Picard then directly says Jono is not Talarian, and, while Picard is acting as fatherly as he can, Jono still wishes to return to Captain Endar.
Later, Picard has called Troi to his ready room to say he does not do well with children, but Troi doesn't accept it, responding with, "Really?" keeping as straight a face as she can. Troi then says how strange it is that while the captain is willing to engage in battles and face hostile aliens, he isn't willing to embrace a parental role. Troi tells him to muddle through, like most parents do when they become parents.
Picard returns to his quarters and finds Jono in a hammock built out of his bedsheets, with the Alba Ra loudly turned on. Picard screams over the sound for the computer to stop the "music" at once, and Jono says that he is in a hammock because he cannot sleep on the beds since they hurt his back. Picard tells Jono about his birth parents, Connor and Moira Rossa, and that he was born on Galen IV. He shows Jono some photos on a PADD and leaves him alone. Picard then gets a report that the Enterprise has been intercepted by the Talarian ship Q'Maire - Endar's ship. Jono is eager to see him, but Picard makes him stay behind for now while he goes to the bridge. After Picard leaves, Jono continues to examine the photos, and starts to remember his parents screaming to get him to safety. He becomes distraught at the thoughts.
Picard arrives on the bridge and contacts Endar. He arranges to send over the four Talarian youth they rescued, and also asks why a Human has been in their custody for so long. Endar says that Jono is his son.


=== Act Three ===
Picard learns that Jono was adopted by Captain Endar after he led the forces that wiped out the colony Jono lived on with his parents until he was three and half years old. Endar beams aboard to discuss the return of Jono to the Talarians, and Picard accuses Endar of torturing the boy. Endar says that according to Talarian custom, he is allowed to claim the son of a slain enemy since his own son was killed in a battle on Castal I by Humans.
However, it seems Jono's injuries are not a result of abuse, but rather Jono's zeal to over-achieve in the warrior culture of the Talarians. Jono is asked whether he wants to return with Endar or be reunited with his biological grandmother, for in Talarian culture he has reached the age where he may choose for himself. He chooses to return with Endar, but Picard will not allow it. Endar threatens war with the Federation if his son is not sent back to the Q'Maire within a certain amount of time. He tells Jono that he may even die in the war, and Jono replies that he is ready to die.


=== Act Four ===
Picard and Jono begin a process of trying to introduce the young man to his Human roots. Jono receives a message from Admiral Rossa, which bring up conflicting emotions for the youth. He cannot understand why a woman would outrank the captain, and states that he cannot be calmed since he cannot do anything he would normally do to calm him. Later, during a game of racquetball between himself and Picard, the sounds of the ball hitting the boards cause him to recount the events of the colony massacre.

Afterward, Picard takes Jono to Ten Forward, where Wesley invites Jono to try a banana split, "quite possibly one of the greatest things in the entire universe." Jono, unaccustomed to using a spoon, stabs the dish and sends ice cream splattering all over Wesley's face and uniform. Picard, Riker and even Jono begin to laugh while Data asks why it's funny, and Riker tells him to look it up in his data banks under humor, sub-heading "slapstick". Wesley also laughs and orders more ice cream for the two of them, while Picard and Riker move to the bar to discuss Jono's progress.
That night, conflicted over whether to reclaim his Humanity or cling to his adopted Talarian father and way of life, Jono walks over to Picard's bed and stands over the captain while he sleeps for a moment. Picard awakens and sees Jono standing there. Jono stabs Picard in his bed with a Klingon d'k tahg knife.


=== Act Five ===
Picard wakes to find himself in sickbay without any serious injury and vaguely surprised to discover it wasn't a dream. Dr. Crusher informs him that his sternum deflected the blade and his injury could have been a lot worse. Jono has been taken into security custody by Lt. Worf. Picard demands to see Jono. Meanwhile, Endar contacts the Enterprise and demands Jono's return. Riker tells him that Jono, having attacked the captain, is in custody and subject to judgment by Starfleet. Endar warns that if Jono is not aboard the Q'maire in five minutes, he and the two Talarian ships that responded to his call for back-up will attack the Enterprise.
The boy is later brought in to answer to what he's done. Jono expects to be killed for harming a superior officer, and clearly expected to die. Picard assures him this will not be the case and begins to understand that they have not handled Jono's problem properly, as Jono explains he feels becoming more Human betrayed everything Endar had done for him and the life he loved with the Talarians.
Picard takes Jono to the bridge and Endar again [as he stated to Riker moments before] insists that the attack would never have happened if they'd have returned Jono as demanded earlier, and that Jono should come home to his father. Picard concedes that the interests and feelings of the boy have not been considered fully, explains as much, and states that he will, indeed, return the boy. Endar thanks him and the attack is over before it began. In the transporter room afterward, Jono also thanks Picard, and finally takes off his gloves to touch Picard in the familiar greeting/farewell that he had given his Talarian father, then returns to the Q'maire.


=== Log entries ===
Captain's log, USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-D), 2367


== Memorable quotes ==
"Ever since I was a child, I've always known exactly what I wanted to do: be a member of Starfleet. Nothing else mattered to me. Virtually my entire youth was spent in the pursuit of that goal. In fact... I probably skipped my childhood altogether."

- Picard

"You, have you ever been a father, Picard? Have you ever had a son desperately trying to win your approval, your respect? Jono broke his ribs riding on a t'stayan. Six hooves, a very powerful beast. The arm he broke in a competition with other youths. He endured the pain and won the competition. One day he will be a great warrior."

- Endar

"I am Talarian."
"You are confused."

- Jono and Worf

"Are you saying that you are willing to go to war over this boy?"
"Would you not for your only son?"

- Picard and Endar

"Captain, is it worth it to go to war over a child?"

- Worf

"Jono, stop that IMMEDIATELY!"

- Picard

"I don't like this place."
"We could find some other quarters."
"I've always lived with my captain."
"Ah... yes, well, that wouldn't work here."

- Jono, discussing living arrangements with Jean-Luc Picard


== Background information ==


=== Production history ===
One-page memo from Hans Beimler and Richard Manning, conveying pitch from Ralph Phillips: 14 November 1989 [1]
Final draft script: 9 July 1990 [2]
Filmed: 19 July 1990 – 27 July 1990
Premiere airdate: 15 October 1990
First UK airdate: 27 April 1994


=== Story ===
Jeri Taylor (who went on to become an executive producer and scriptwriter for both this series and Star Trek: Voyager) joined the Star Trek production team with this episode. Taylor was recommended by short-time producer Lee Sheldon. Because she had no prior experience or knowledge of Star Trek, she was given a "crash-course" in the series, both old and new, with a very large number of videotapes. (Star Trek: The Next Generation Companion, 2nd ed., p. 140)
Taylor described her strengths as a writer as "long on character and personal relationships, and very short on sci-fi." This episode, she noted, "was all about the relationship between Picard and this adolescent boy, and so, having had adolescent boys, I had that down pretty well. Then I just filled in past that. I actually lifted a whole section of tech from one of the scripts they had given me and just copied that. So that part came out sounding really good." (Star Trek: The Next Generation - The Continuing Mission, pp. 130 & 133)
Jeri Taylor originally called the alien race "Phrygians". On the advice of Michael Okuda, the producers decided to choose a race that had been mentioned but not seen. The Talarians had been first referred to in "Heart of Glory". (Star Trek: The Next Generation Companion, 2nd ed., p. 140)


=== Production ===

This episode is a bottle show. (Star Trek: The Next Generation Companion, 2nd ed., p. 140)
Although it aired as the fourth episode of the season, "Suddenly Human" was actually filmed second. (Star Trek: The Next Generation Companion, 2nd ed., pp. 139-140) An earlier version of the shooting script dated July 18, 1990, set it at stardate 44085.7, and the July 19 script for "Brothers" used 44149.1; ultimately, the stardates were swapped, which kept the stardates in order when the episodes aired out of production order. The timelines given in Star Trek Chronology and Voyages of Imagination, which generally reflect production order prior to the start of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, reflect the airdate/stardate order for these episodes instead, listing "Family" followed by "Brothers" followed by this episode.
Geordi La Forge appears only for a very brief scene which is actually recycled footage. Prior to the filming of "The Best of Both Worlds, Part II", LeVar Burton had surgery and couldn't make an appearance. [3](X)
The Talarian writing and logo, first seen aboard the Batris in "Heart of Glory" are seen again aboard the observation craft.
The Talarian uniforms were later re-used in "Man Of The People" for guards on Rekag-Seronia.
Connor Rossa is seen wearing the 2350s-2370s style Starfleet uniform on a photograph holding young Jeremiah shortly after his birth in 2353. This might be the earliest chronological appearance of the uniform.
This episode marks one of the few times that a sheathed d'k tahg is seen. Captain Picard keeps one in his quarters.
The rifles worn by the Talarian militia were later re-used as Romulan disruptor rifles.
Among the costumes and props from this episode which were sold off on the It's A Wrap! sale and auction on eBay, was a Talarian helmet. [4](X)
The episode was filmed mainly on Paramount Stage 9 and 16.


=== Reception ===
When this episode first aired, it generated some controversy with some fans claiming it condoned child abuse.
Michael Piller recalled, "We got some pretty angry letters on that show. They said, 'How can you let an abused child go back to the people who are abusing him?' We really brought the child abuse issue up because it was the right and natural thing to bring up in the context in the story. There are real parallels to stories that go on in today's world about parents who fight over custody and one says there's been abuse. Who do you believe? But mostly, it was a cultural clash story. It was a story of someone who was Human who had been raised in a totally alien environment. Is he Human any longer? That's really what that story was about." (Captains' Logs: The Unauthorized Complete Trek Voyages, pp. 209-210)
Rick Berman added, "We wanted to make the point that the interpretation of broken bones was nothing more than normal childhood broken bones, and that these people were sort of prejudiced in this direction. It was in no way intended to be an episode that had anything to do with child abuse. It was the Wild child. It had to do with a boy being brought from one culture to another and not fitting in with either, and the inevitable need for him to return back to the world in which he grew up." (Captains' Logs: The Unauthorized Complete Trek Voyages, p. 210)
As for the episode itself, Piller opined, "I think that episode was marvelously written by Jeri Taylor and it was strong enough to hire her on staff. I was disappointed by the show primarily because the aliens weren't alien enough. I felt there was some miscommunication on some level. The whole idea of that show was missed because these savage, different alien type creatures turned out to be very Human." (Captains' Logs: The Unauthorized Complete Trek Voyages, p. 210)
A mission report for this episode by John Sayers was published in The Official Star Trek: The Next Generation Magazine issue 15, pp. 21-23.
Racquetball would later be introduced in Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, such as in the episode "Rivals".


=== Video and DVD releases ===
Original UK VHS release (two-episode tapes, CIC Video): Volume 39, 17 February 1992
UK re-release (three-episode tapes, Paramount Home Entertainment): Volume 4.2, 7 May 2001
As part of the TNG Season 4 DVD collection


== Links and references ==


=== Starring ===
Patrick Stewart as Capt. Jean-Luc Picard
Jonathan Frakes as Cmdr. William Riker


=== Also starring ===
LeVar Burton as Lt. Cmdr. Geordi La Forge
Michael Dorn as Lieutenant Worf
Gates McFadden as Dr. Beverly Crusher
Marina Sirtis as Counselor Deanna Troi
Brent Spiner as Lt. Commander Data
Wil Wheaton as Ensign Wesley Crusher


=== Guest stars ===
Sherman Howard as Endar
Chad Allen as Jono/Jeremiah Rossa
Barbara Townsend as Connaught Rossa


=== Uncredited co-stars ===
K.C. Amos as operations division officer
Rachen Assapiomonwait as Nelson
Majel Barrett as Enterprise computer voice
Karin Baxter as operations division ensign
Michael Braveheart as Martinez
Larry Echerer as Talarian cadet
Brian Goldman as Talarian cadet
Eben Ham as security ensign
Carrie Henger as security officer
Hogan as Talarian cadet
Gary Hunter as Connor Rossa (photograph)
Mark Lentry as science division officer
Lorine Mendell as Diana Giddings
Talbot as Ten Forward waitress
Weisberger as Talarian cadet
Harry Young as science division officer
Unknown performers as
Jeremiah Rossa (age 4)
Jeremiah Rossa (infant)
Moira Rossa
Female nurse
Nurse
Talarian officer 1
Talarian officer 2
Ten Forward waiter
Transporter officer (off-screen voiceover)


=== Stand-ins ===
Nora Leonhardt – stand-in for Marina Sirtis
Tim McCormack – stand-in for Brent Spiner
Lorine Mendell – stand-in for Gates McFadden
Randy Pflug – stand-in for Sherman Howard
Richard Sarstedt – stand-in for Jonathan Frakes
Dennis Tracy – stand-in for Patrick Stewart
Guy Vardaman – stand-in for Wil Wheaton
James Washington – stand-in for Michael Dorn


=== References ===
2353; 2357; 2360; "a lot"; abuse; abuser; admiral; Age of Decision; agreement; Alba Ra; "all right" (aka "alright"); alien; amusement; ancillary power; approach vector; arm; artery; "as soon as possible"; assistant; asteroid storm; "at peace"; "at the hands of"; attention; authority; autosuture; auxiliary power; away team; baby; back; ball; banana split; basic training; bearing; beast; bed; betrayal; blade; bleeder; B'Nar; body; border skirmish; brae; brother; cadet; cage; calcium; calcium trace pattern; captain; captive; captivity; captor; Castal I; century; ceremony of initiation; child abuse; childhood; children; choice; claim; colony; "come in"; "come on"; "come with us"; comedy; competition; computer; comrade; concussion; conflict; contest; coordinates; crime (offense); cultural trait; custody; dagger; data banks; day; death; degree; d'k tahg; diplomacy; dissection; distance; distress call; DNA gene type; dream; Earth; emergency evacuation (aka evacuation); Endar's son; enemy; Enterprise-D, USS; evidence; experience; explanation; family; farce; father figure; Federation; Federation-Talarian border; feeling; forest; fracture; freedom; friend; Galen border conflict; Galen IV; Galen IV colony; glove; "go ahead"; goal; grandmother; guerrilla; hammock; hand; "have a safe journey"; heart; "here we go"; heritage; "hold them off"; home; hoof; horseplay; hour; Human (aka Humanity); humor; "I see"; ice cream; identity; impulse engine; "in fact"; "in my keeping"; injury; intention; job; joy; killed in action; kilometer; Klingon; Krasner outpost; laser; laugh; leader; leak; lie; life sign; light storm; love; "made yourself at home"; maximum warp; medical care; medical tricorder; meeting; melody; memory; Merchant of Venice, The; Milky Way Galaxy; merculite rocket; minute; miracle; month; mourn; murder; music; mystery; name; neutral particle weapon; night; noise; "not at all"; "not bad"; number one; "of course not"; offensive potential; "on my way"; "one moment"; order; pain; pie in face; place; Q'Maire; parent; patriarchical society; peace; person; picture; propulsion system; racquetball; racket; radiation; radiation burn; radiation damage; radiation injury; radiation leak; rank; red; red alert; relationship; representative; rescue operation; respiratory distress; rib; "right away"; river; room; Rossa; Rossa's grandfather; Sector 21947; secure channel; security; self-destruct; self-destruct device; sextant; single plane penetration; "sit down"; slapstick; sound; spoon; Starfleet; Starfleet Command; Starfleet uniform; status; sternum; Stockholm syndrome; stubbornness; subheading; subspace channel; subspace communication; subspace communiqué; subspace proximity detonator; superior officer; surrogate son; survivor; t'stayan; tactic; "take me home"; Talarian; Talarian custom; Talarian homeworld; Talarian observation craft; Talarian territory; Talarian uniform; Talarian warship; Talarian youths; target; teen; test; thing; three-dimensional chess; torture; tradition; training ship; transport locked-in; transporter coordinates; Transporter Room 3; trauma team; trespasser; triangular envelopment; tricorder; troop; trust; universe; velocity; "very well"; victim; victory; voice; violation; visit; visual contact; vital organs; voice; warrior; warship; weapon; weapons system; Woden sector; X-ray laser; year; "you know"; "you see"; youth


==== Other references ====
Engineering Division Duty Roster – Third Shift Antimatter Operations Unit: D'Angelo, Dick; Finks, Wilbur; Foster, Don, Jr.; Mees, Jim; Nesterowicz, John; safety officer; Sepulveda, Fernando; Third Shift Antimatter Operations Unit


=== External links ===
"Suddenly Human" at Memory Beta, the wiki for licensed Star Trek works
"Suddenly Human" at Wikipedia
"Suddenly Human" at MissionLogPodcast.com
"Suddenly HUman" script at Star Trek Minutiae
"Suddenly Human" at the Internet Movie Database