After an encounter with a mysterious alien probe, Lieutenant Barclay begins to exhibit signs of profound intelligence, ultimately hooking himself into the ship's computer and hurling the Enterprise into apparent danger.


== Summary ==


=== Teaser ===
Reg Barclay and Dr. Crusher perform a scene from Cyrano de Bergerac in the theater room before a handful of the crew, including the senior officers. Crusher's performance is great as Cyrano's love interest but who is a woman already in love with another man, Cyrano's compatriot. But Barclay's performance, as Cyrano himself, complete with long prosthetic nose, is awkward, halting, and somewhat embarrassing to watch. Despite this rather lackluster performance, the crew present claps for both Crusher and Barclay, which puzzles Data until Riker explains that "it's polite." Afterwards, Troi compliments Barclay, saying it takes a lot of confidence to put himself out there and act, but Barclay doesn't feel too confident, awkwardly remaining on the play's set after everyone else has left.

"Captain's log, Stardate 44704.2. We have arrived at the Argus Array, a remote subspace telescope at the very edge of Federation space. The unmanned structure mysteriously stopped relaying its data nearly two months ago."
The USS Enterprise-D arrives at the Argus Array, a gigantic subspace telescope where the computer has failed and the reactors are going critical. A huge amount of time is estimated for its repair, but of more pressing concern is the mysterious alien probe now holding station near the array, determined to be the cause of its malfunctions. Geordi La Forge is assigned to examine the probe using a shuttle, and he decides to take Barclay along to help. As the two conduct some unsuccessful scans, Barclay thanks La Forge for selecting him for the mission. La Forge assures Reg that he's one of his best engineers and deserves to get to the "interesting stuff" sometimes. La Forge points at the probe just outside the shuttle's viewport and tells Barclay that this is why he is in Starfleet. Suddenly the probe emits a super-bright flash that knocks Barclay unconscious.


=== Act One ===
"Captain's log, supplemental. An intense energy surge from the alien probe has severely disabled the shuttle's onboard computer. The away team has been transported directly to sickbay, where Lieutenant Barclay remains under observation."
The Enterprise tries to tow the probe with them back to a starbase to examine it.
Barclay, in sickbay, awakens to the news from Crusher that the flash overloaded his optic nerves, and that was what knocked him unconscious; La Forge's VISOR must have filtered out the bright light. As he is leaving, in an uncharacteristic show of self-confidence, Barclay makes a suggestion about how Dr. Crusher could more quickly get a read-out of his sero-aminos if she used her scanner's global mode. She brushes him off because she thinks that his suggestion is something that can be applied only to isolinear circuits and not Human cells, but he insists it would work. Suddenly, the Enterprise goes to red alert.
The probe is beginning to follow the Enterprise. An energy field starts to form around the probe and the Enterprise leaves it because the ship may not have the shield strength to withstand the intensity of the energy field. Barclay adjusts the phasers before La Forge can tell him to do so, but they have no effect, and the ship will be badly damaged if they try firing photon torpedoes at such a close range. Captain Picard orders Ensign Anaya to take the ship to warp two, but it becomes clear the ship won't outrun the probe. Picard asks for suggestions, but nobody has any. Suddenly, the Enterprise drops to impulse as Barclay, without authorization, has diverted the power to the shields which, using a new equation he's just thought up, have been reinforced by 300%. He tells Picard to fire a full spread of photon torpedoes at maximum yield and the shields will hold. Unsure, but with no other options, Picard gives Worf the command to fire and the probe is indeed destroyed with no damage to the ship. Barclay apologizes for overstepping the bounds of authority to La Forge, but La Forge is more surprised than angry.


=== Act Two ===
"Captain's log, Stardate 44705.3. The Enterprise has destroyed the alien probe, but now we are left with the difficult task of repairing the Argus Telescope. Failure to do so would represent an incalculable scientific loss."
Captain Picard calls a meeting in the observation lounge to discuss the repair of the Argus telescope. La Forge says that it would take approximately two to three weeks to repair the telescope. Barclay, who has been called into the meeting because of his recent success, suggests that they could repair all eighteen of the telescope's generators simultaneously, instead of one by one. Data says it would take seven weeks' preparation to implement Barclay's method of designing a new control system, but everyone is incredulous when Barclay confidently says he can do it in two days.
Barclay then rehearses another scene from Cyrano de Bergerac with Dr. Crusher. This time, his performance is so riveting that there are tears in Crusher's eyes, and she momentarily forgets her own lines. Troi, who has been watching the scene, is also very surprised. She follows him to Ten Forward, where she tells him that he has improved greatly. Barclay tells Troi that he is aware that he has changed and is now so full of confidence. He then makes a pass at Troi, who as counselor says that it would be inappropriate for them to have a romantic relationship. Barclay is still insistent that they take a walk in the arboretum, where he says the Zalnias are in bloom, but Troi ends the conversation with, "Good night, Mr. Barclay."

The next morning, Barclay is late for the meeting that he called. La Forge finds him in Holodeck 3 where Barclay had spent the night exploring some aspects of advanced physics and discussing them with a virtual Albert Einstein and lost track of time. La Forge says that something must have happened from the probe's light in order for him to have suddenly gained the confidence as well as the intelligence and takes Barclay to sickbay for an examination. Barclay asks if they have to, as he has now become the person he has always wanted to be. La Forge responds that yes, they should.
Dr. Crusher is astounded by what she finds: Barclay's intellect has increased in all areas of study, eventually reaching hypercognitive levels (Barclay estimates his IQ as being between 1200 and 1450). His new intelligence is caused by neurotransmitters hypersecreting in his brain. His corpus callosum is so active that it is as though the two hemispheres of his brain are fused. It's not just Barclay's raw intelligence that's been enhanced, as he is also exhibiting enhanced creativity, imagination and resourcefulness. Crusher says that Barclay must be the most advanced Human being ever to live. Barclay is not surprised at this.


=== Act Three ===

The senior officers are called into the ready room and they discuss how to take care of this new problem that is affecting Barclay. Riker suggests confining Barclay to quarters, but Picard decides that since nothing he has done has been menacing, Barclay will still be allowed to perform his duties, especially since his immense intelligence is needed to repair the Argus.
La Forge is called to engineering because one of the Argus' reactors is about to overload. La Forge and Barclay, along with Larson and Brower, try everything they can to stop the overload, and Barclay executes La Forge's commands before he can give them. Finally, Barclay decides he needs a newer, faster interface, so he heads to Holodeck 3 to create a neural scan interface. The computer, however, does not have that kind of program on file so Barclay then instructs the computer how to build one. The Argus is seconds away from being overloaded and will take the Enterprise with it, and to make matters worse, Worf and Ensign Anaya lose control of the computer. But all of a sudden, the Argus reactors miraculously shut down and the computer comes back on. Picard asks the computer how the reactors were shut down, but it is Reginald Barclay's voice that answers. Barclay, interfaced with the computer, is now running the functions on the Enterprise and had repaired the reactors himself. In doing so, he had locked out the main bridge from using the computer. Barclay is now acting as the computer, and this causes discomfort among the crew.


=== Act Four ===
Barclay tells the senior officers why he did it. Picard instructs Barclay to remove himself from the computer at once, but Barclay says that his higher brain functions are now in the computer, and he will die if he is removed from it. Picard calls an emergency meeting, and has La Forge disconnect the audio and visual modules in the observation lounge so that the computer/Barclay cannot monitor their discussion. At this point, La Forge can't tell where the computer ends, and Barclay begins. Also, with each second that passes Barclay is further taking control of the ship. Although Picard doesn't want to hurt Barclay, he is not willing to allow him to maintain such total control over the computer and decides he must be removed by any means necessary. The crew decide to follow La Forge's plan to bypass certain modules to allow them to at least keep control of propulsion systems to get them to the nearest starbase.
La Forge crawls into a Jefferies tube and tries to install an ODN bypass. Barclay asks why he is there, and La Forge lies about needing to do the level 3 diagnostic they discussed earlier. They get on the topic of the change in Barclay, who believes it was a gift and plans to do more for Humanity. Barclay is now trying new ways of traveling through space. Against Picard's orders, Barclay initiates a subspace distortion using the warp drive of the Enterprise. Troi elects to talk to him to try to put an end to all this.
In the holodeck, she explains to Barclay that his actions have frightened the whole crew, which he rebuffs, likening their fears as young children scared of the world. He pleads with Troi to trust him, but she warns him that Picard will do everything in his power to stop him, and leaves. The beams of the neural interface over Barclay's head accelerate.
The ship goes to red alert as La Forge is ready to install the bypass, but Barclay comes on the comm and informs him that he is too late. The bypass is blocked, meaning there is no way to stop his actions. The Enterprise accelerates and moves towards the distortion.


=== Act Five ===
With all communication between the bridge and Barclay cut, Picard has no choice but to disconnect him from the computer. He orders Worf to take a security team to the holodeck to carry it out.
Worf and two security officers enter the holodeck with mere seconds before the ship reaches the distortion. Barclay informs Worf that he will not take his actions personally and protects himself with a force field. After their phaser fire is blocked, Worf and the officers are thrown to the floor as the Enterprise enters the distortion.
Upon arriving, they realize they have traveled over thirty thousand light years, to the center of the galaxy. They then see that all functions and computer control are back to normal. Just then, a giant white-haired and bearded male humanoid head appears in front of the viewscreen to the bridge crew; he comments in fascination at their physiology and command structure. Barclay, now safely disconnected from the computer, arrives and explains that the being, who is a member of a race known as the Cytherians, and his people are on a similar mission to that of the Enterprise, in that they want to explore the galaxy to learn. But instead of the Cytherians traveling away from their home, they bring those they are interested in to them. The probe they had encountered was the instrument of this "summons," but it ran afoul of incompatible Federation technology. However, it had been able to find a suitable vessel: Barclay himself. Riker grins as the crew realizes they are in no danger.

"Captain's log, Stardate 44721.9. After ten days in the company of the Cytherians, the Enterprise has been safely returned to Federation space. We bring back knowledge of their race that will take our scholars decades to examine. Lieutenant Barclay is apparently no worse for his experience."
After ten days of exchanging information, which Picard notes will take Federation scholars decades to fully analyze and appreciate, the Cytherians send the Enterprise back to Federation space and restore Barclay to normal. Later, in Ten Forward, Barclay is with La Forge and Troi, and they are discussing how Barclay is back to his old self. Barclay, who can still remember everything he did, even if he can't remember quite how he did it, can't help but feel a little let down, but Troi reassures him that many people experience moments in their lives when they exceed their own limits and that it is possible to carry something from that experience with them for the rest of their lives. La Forge then reminds Barclay that he's still a valued member of the crew and asks for his help with the level 3 diagnostic. Reg appears cheerfully ready to get back to work, but Troi interrupts, telling him that he owed her a walk in the arboretum.
It appears that Barclay is back to normal, as he is nervous about the walk in the arboretum, but he goes up to a pair of officers playing three-dimensional chess and tells them how to force mate in nine moves. Troi exclaims that she did not know Barclay played chess, and Barclay, in his nervous voice, states that he doesn't.


=== Log entries ===
Captain's log, USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-D), 2367


== Memorable quotes ==
"Bravo!"
"Wonderful! Wonderful!"
"Lieutenant Barclay's performance was adequate but clearly not rooted in the method approach. I do not understand why..."
"Data... because it's polite."

- Riker, Troi, and Data, after Barclay's performance

"Worf, I have an opening in my workshop."

- Beverly Crusher, to Worf after the Cyrano de Bergerac play

"It just occurred to me that I could set up a frequency harmonic between the deflector and the shield grid… using the warp field generator as a power flow anti-attenuator and that of course naturally created an amplification of the inherent energy output."
"Uh-huh, I see that."

- Reginald Barclay and William Riker

"You just spent the entire night arguing grand unification theories with Albert Einstein!"

- Geordi La Forge, to Reginald Barclay

"I'm sorry if I overstepped my authority."
(quietly) "Don't mention it."

- Barclay to La Forge, after he increased the Enterprise's shields by 300% and told Picard to use torpedoes on the Cytherian probe

"I've finally become the person I've always wanted to be. Do we have to ask why?"
"Yeah. I think we do."

- Reginald Barclay and Geordi La Forge

"Incredible! The production of neurotransmitters in your brain has jumped over 500%!… I couldn't even guess at your IQ level now."
"Probably somewhere between 1200 and 1450."

- Beverly Crusher and Reginald Barclay

"Lieutenant, you could very well be the most advanced Human being who has ever lived."

- Crusher, to Barclay

"Has Mister Barclay done anything that could be considered… potentially threatening?"
(a beat, then…)
"Well… he did make a pass at me last night." (looks from Riker and La Forge) "A good one."
"I'd hardly consider that a threat."
"No, but it's certainly unusual behavior for Barclay."

- Picard, Troi, and La Forge, discussing Barclay with Riker and Crusher

"Tie both consoles into the Enterprise main computer core utilizing neural-scan interface."
"There is no such device on file. "
"No problem, here's how you build it. "

- Reginald Barclay and Enterprise computer

"I'm afraid I can't do that, sir."

- Reginald Barclay, (while attached to ship's computer) to Jean-Luc Picard

"I wish I could convey to you what it's like for me now; what I've become… I can conceive almost infinite possibilities and can fully explore each of them in a nanosecond. I perceive the universe as a single equation, and it is so simple. I understand… everything."

- Reginald Barclay

"Emotive electrochemical stimulus response; cranial plate; bipedal locomotion; endo-skeletal contiguous external integument."
"I'm Captain Jean-Luc Picard, of the Federation starship Enterprise."
"Hierarchical collective command structure."
"Who are you?"
"Interrogative!"
"I am interrogative, yes, and I would appreciate an explanation."

- Cytherian alien and Jean-Luc Picard

"How do you feel now?"
"Smaller. "
"Just plain old Barclay, huh?"
"It always seems to come back to that, doesn't it? "

- Deanna Troi, Reginald Barclay, and Geordi La Forge

" May I? (moves a piece) Checkmate in nine moves."
" I didn't know you play chess."
" I don't… "

- Reginald Barclay and Deanna Troi


== Background information ==


=== Production history ===
Final draft script: 25 January 1991 [1]
Filmed: 28 January 1991 – 5 February 1991
Insert shots filmed: 22 February 1991
Premiere airdate: 1 April 1991
First UK airdate: 26 October 1994


=== Story and script ===

"The Nth Degree" originated as a vehicle to allow popular guest star Dwight Schultz to reprise his role of Reginald Barclay. Michael Piller recalled, "We had sort of put in our laundry list of things we wanted to bring back fourth season. "Hollow Pursuits" was a wonderful episode last year, and [Barclay] is a very interesting character and a great actor. We were having trouble finding something that would make it worthwhile to bring him back. Joe had this concept of somebody who became super intelligent and said, 'Maybe this could be our Barclay show,' and we weren't sure what we were going to do with our premise at first, but we finally got a story together." He added, "I think Rick came up with the idea of doing Cyrano. It was kind of a con on the audience." (Captains' Logs: The Unauthorized Complete Trek Voyages, p. 218)
Brannon Braga remarked, "We struggled for a year with how to have Barclay come back. We didn't want him to play the nervous chap in the holodeck again and Joe Menosky came up with the science-fiction notion of a probe which is essentially a ship in a bottle. It was a good twist on that particular character which you could only get to with a science-fiction gag." (Captains' Logs: The Unauthorized Complete Trek Voyages, pp. 218-219)
Joe Menosky wrote the episode as a homage to the classic science fiction short story (and later novel) Flowers for Algernon. He commented, "Writing for Barclay was a bit like writing for Data – you knew you just couldn't lose." (Star Trek: The Next Generation 365, p. 199).
According to Rob Legato, the script was constantly revised, with the final scene only delivered on the day of shooting. In earlier drafts, the Cytherian was more malevolent, but this was changed to avoid the common hostage plot. (Star Trek: The Next Generation Companion, 2nd ed., p. 160)
Originally, the Cytherian would have simply boarded the ship. The staff felt that this, or an appearance on a viewscreen, was too ordinary. As Legato remembered, "What, we go all this way to see a guy on the screen?" Instead, Legato suggested the alien's final appearance – a huge head that appears to pop out of the screen. (Star Trek: The Next Generation 365, p. 199)
The Feynman was named for physicist Richard Feynman. (Star Trek: The Next Generation Companion, 2nd ed., p. 160)


=== Production ===
"The Nth Degree" was filmed between Monday 28 January 1991 and Tuesday 5 February 1991 on Paramount Stage 8, 9, and 16. Insert shots with Patrick Stewart and Brent Spiner were filmed on Friday 22 February 1991 on Paramount Stage 8 and 16.
Live lasers were used in the scenes where Barclay interfaces with the computer. According to Michael Piller, "We've used laser beams in post production for firing things and lighting effects, and we've had several meetings where we've wanted to use them in production but have never done it. Rob suggested it on this episode and it was a wonderful idea – all those beams coming down and hitting his head are all laser beams and mirrors. It's all live, it's another effect we want to use more of. It's really weird and allows you to move the camera. If it was laid down in post-production, you wouldn't be able to. It has a real immediacy and in terms of technical stuff that was a real advancement in terms of using lasers on stage...Part of it was shot at eight frames per second, and part at six frames. Then we harmonized the voice down to that speed so that the voices work within that eight frames. It was a wild effect. It was a great episode for [Rob] to do so he could draw on all of his tricks." (Captains' Logs: The Unauthorized Complete Trek Voyages, p. 218-219)
This episode has one of the longest teasers in the franchise, seven minutes and 21 seconds long.


=== Cast and characters ===

Jim Norton plays the holographic Albert Einstein again in Next Generation's sixth season finale "Descent".
Kay E. Kuter later plays the Sirah in the Star Trek: Deep Space Nine episode "The Storyteller".


=== Music ===
This episode was scored by Ron Jones.


=== Continuity ===
This is not the first Federation starship named Enterprise to travel to the center of the galaxy. In Star Trek V: The Final Frontier, the USS Enterprise-A traveled under the control of Sybok to the mythical Sha Ka Ree, believed to be located at the galactic center, where they met a god-like alien.
Unlike the tragic Gary Mitchell in Where No Man Has Gone Before (episode) whose ESP powers lead to his doom, Lt Barclay's expanded intelligence actually helps the Enterprise mission.


=== Reception ===
Michael Piller remarked, "I was really pleased with the way it turned out. Joe Menosky has said he was really proud to have his name on that show, more so than any other show. That's Rob Legato's second episode and Rob did a masterful job in terms of interpreting the story." (Captains' Logs: The Unauthorized Complete Trek Voyages, p. 218)
A mission report for this episode by Patrick Daniel O'Neill was published in The Official Star Trek: The Next Generation Magazine issue 16, pp. 58-61.


=== Video and DVD releases ===
Original UK VHS release (two-episode tapes, CIC Video): Volume 47, May 1992
UK re-release (three-episode tapes, Paramount Home Entertainment): Volume 4.7, 3 September 2001
As part of the TNG Season 4 DVD collection


== Links and references ==


=== Starring ===
Patrick Stewart as Capt. Jean-Luc Picard
Jonathan Frakes as Cmdr. William Riker


=== Also starring ===
LeVar Burton as Lt. Cmdr. Geordi La Forge
Michael Dorn as Lieutenant Worf
Gates McFadden as Dr. Beverly Crusher
Marina Sirtis as Counselor Deanna Troi
Brent Spiner as Lt. Commander Data


=== Guest stars ===
Jim Norton as Albert Einstein
Kay E. Kuter as Cytherian
Saxon Trainor as Larson
Page Leong as Anaya
And
Dwight Schultz as Barclay


=== Co-star ===
David Coburn as Ensign Brower


=== Uncredited co-stars ===
Anthony as Ten Forward waiter
Rachen Assapiomonwait as Nelson
Majel Barrett as USS Enterprise-D computer voice
Karin Baxter as operations division ensign
Thomas J. Booth as civilian
Bowman as science division officer
Michael Braveheart as Martinez
Debbie David as Russell
Cameron as Kellogg
Max Cervantes as operations division officer
Tracee Lee Cocco as Jae
George Colucci as security officer
Cooper as Reel
Gerard David as operations division ensign
B.J. Davis as security officer
Denise Deuschle as science division officer
Elliot Durant III as operations division ensign
Margaret Flores as sciences officer
Michele Gerren as sciences officer
D. Kai as sciences officer
Mark Kosakura as operations division ensign
Judy Lea as sciences officer
Mark Lentry as civilian
Marin as command division officer
Debbie Marsh as command division officer
Michael Moorehead as science division ensign
Teri Noel as operations division officer
Ivonne Perez as civilian
Randy Pflug as Jones
Brandy Pickett as science division officer
Keith Rayve as command division ensign
John Rice as science division officer
Denise Lynne Roberts as Patti
Joycelyn Robinson as Gates
Richard Sarstedt as command division officer
Curt Truman as command division officer
Mikki Val as operations division officer
Guy Vardaman as Darien Wallace
Harry Young as science division officer
Unknown performers as
Female operations division officer
Ten Forward waiter #1
Ten Forward waiter #2
Two civilian women


=== Stand-ins ===
Brett – stand-in for LeVar Burton
Cameron – stand-in for Gates McFadden
Mark Lentry – stand-in for David Coburn
Nora Leonhardt – stand-in for Marina Sirtis
Lissa – stand-in for Page Leong
Tim McCormack – stand-in for Brent Spiner, Jonathan Frakes, and Dwight Schultz
Lorine Mendell – stand-in for Gates McFadden & Saxon Trainor
John Rice – stand-in for Jim Norton
Richard Sarstedt – stand-in for Jonathan Frakes
Dennis Tracy – stand-in for Patrick Stewart
Guy Vardaman – stand-in for Dwight Schultz
James Washington – stand-in for Michael Dorn


=== References ===
=; 47; acting; acting ability; alien; allergic reaction; alpha-numeric console; ångström; anti-attenuator; arboretum; Argus Array; arrow (symbol); audience; audio pickup; authority; baron; bee; behavior; Bergerac; bio-cellular disruption; bipedal locomotion; blackboard; bloom; body; bone; brain; brother; bypass; calculation; cell; central processing unit; cerebral hemisphere; chain reaction; checkmate; chess; children; close down sequence; collision course; command structure; computer; computer control; computer core (main computer core); computer system; conduit; confidence; confined to quarters; contiguous external integument; control system; core memory; cornea; corpus callosum; cosmological constant; courage; course; cranial plate; creativity; crib; Cyrano de Bergerac; Cytherian; Cytherian homeworld; Cytherian homeworld system; Cytherian probe; data: date; de Bergerac, Hercule-Savinien De Cyrano; de Neuvillette, Christien; death; decade; deflector; device; devil; dimension; distance; duelist; electro-chemical stimulus response; electromagnetic band; electromagnetic signature; emitter; endoskeletal; energy; energy field; energy output; energy source; energy surge; engineer; engineering; engineering subsystem; equation; experience; experiment; explanation; explosion; Federation; Federation space; Feynman; field intensity; force field; French Guards; frequency harmonic; fusion reactor; galactic center; Galilei, Galileo; general relativity; German language; gift; global mode; Grand Unification theory; graviton field; Greek alphabet; hand; heading; "hello"; helm; hierarchical collective; higher brain function (primary cerebral function); holodeck three; holographic program; home; Human (Humanity); hundred; iconic display console; idea; imagination; infinity; inspiration; intelligence; intelligence quotient; interrogative; isolinear chip; isolinear circuits; Jefferies tube; kilometer; Kohlan system; knowledge; lake; length; lesson; level 3 diagnostic; light year; liquid helium; location; "locking a man up"; main shuttlebay; maximum speed; memory; meeting; meter per second; Method acting; Midsummer Night's Dream, A; Milky Way Galaxy; minute; mission; Moon; mourning veil; muon; music school; musician; nanosecond; neighborhood; neural scan interface; neurotransmitter; neutron densitometer; neutron emission; neutrino; night; nu; number one; observation; ODN; online; opinion; optic nerve; order; oscillation; "out of my league"; outsider; overload; paradise; parents; park; passive high-resolution series; percent; performance; phaser; phaser power; philosopher; photon torpedo; plan; planetary cluster; plasma; playing; poet; Porte de Nesle; positron emission test; post synaptic membrane; power emission; power flow; presynaptic membrane; probe; production; professor; progress; propulsion; propulsion system; quantum electrodynamic; quantum model; quantum principle; question; radiation pattern; red alert; reed; regiment; rehearsal; repairs; report; respect; result; Roxane: running; scanner; scene; scholar; Science Station 402; scientist; second; security team; semiset; sero-amino readout; shield grid; short range scan; shunt; shutdown; Socrates; soul; speed; stabilization procedure; stabilizer; stage; "stand by"; standard isolation procedure; starbase; starboard; Starfleet; status; sting; summer; subatomic; subspace; subspace antenna cluster; subspace continuum; subspace distortion; subspace field distortion; subspace flow matrix; subspace telescope; suggestion; summer; sword; teacher; tear; terawatt; theater; thermal level; thought; thousand; threat; three-dimensional chess; tow; truth; unconsciousness; universe; value; veil; visual pickup; violin; violin technique; VISOR; visual wavelength; wall; warp; warp field generator; warp nacelle; warp power; week; weep; workshop; workstation chair; x; zalnias


=== External links ===
"The Nth Degree" at Memory Beta, the wiki for licensed Star Trek works
"The Nth Degree" at Wikipedia
"The Nth Degree" at MissionLogPodcast.com
"The Nth Degree" script at Star Trek Minutiae
"The Nth Degree" at the Internet Movie Database